# Pages

<article class="epigraph">

> These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
> peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible
> to the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing
> them with his own insight.

["The Divine Net"]{.epigraph-translated-title}
([Brahmajālasutta]{.epigraph-root-title})\
[Dīgha Nikāya 1]{.epigraph-reference}

</article>

[]{#foreword.xhtml}

<article class="foreword" id="foreword">

# The SuttaCentral Editions Series

Since 2005 SuttaCentral has provided access to the texts, translations,
and parallels of early Buddhist texts. In 2018 we started creating and
publishing our translations of these seminal spiritual classics. The
"Editions" series now makes selected translations available as books in
various forms, including print, PDF, and EPUB.

Editions are selected from our most complete, well-crafted, and reliable
translations. They aim to bring these texts to a wider audience in forms
that reward mindful reading. Care is taken with every detail of the
production, and we aim to meet or exceed professional best standards in
every way. These are the core scriptures underlying the entire Buddhist
tradition, and we believe that they deserve to be preserved and made
available in the highest quality without compromise.

SuttaCentral is a charitable organization. Our work is accomplished by
volunteers and through the generosity of our donors. Everything we
create is offered to all of humanity free of any copyright or licensing
restrictions.

</article>

[]{#preface.xhtml}

<article class="preface" id="preface">

# Preface to *Long Discourses*

I grew up in Perth, Western Australia. It's a city that is often
described as "nice", a somewhat backhanded compliment. The weather is
bright and sunny, it's safe and prosperous, life is good. But it's not a
place where anything particularly happens. Certainly not anything
meaningful or interesting to anyone outside of Perth.

As a musician, I would sing songs about New York, about Paris, about
Memphis or Singapore or even Darlinghurst. I didn't know those places,
but I knew that they were meaningful places, places deserving of a song.
My own life, by contrast, seemed entirely on the surface. The bright sun
and clear skies of Perth had no poetry, it banished all the shadows,
everything was just so bland. There was nothing to sing about.

You're sensing a plot twist coming up, and you're right. In those
days---the early 80s---the Perth indie music scene produced its finest
band, the Triffids. The singer Dave McComb wrote about things that had
happened to me: "he swam out to the edge of the reef, there were cuts
along his skin." I knew what that was like, not because someone had told
me, but because I'd done it myself. Suddenly I was living in a world of
meaning. I realized that my place, and therefore my life, was just as
real and just as meaningful as anything else. The bleaching light of
Perth was its meaning, the lack of shadows was its shadow.

When I came to Buddhism, it all seemed so exotic, so distant. I was made
to chant in this strange language "Pali", which I'd never even heard of.
It took me a while to even realize that Pali was an actual language, not
just a mystical invocation. The monks I met were strange and
incomprehensible: who would choose such a life? It had a depth that made
my own paltry life pale in comparison.

As I began to study Buddhism in depth, grappling with deep matters, I
discovered a range of other scholars and practitioners to learn from.
There were the meditation masters of the Thai forest tradition in which
I had ordained---Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Mun, Ajahn Thate, Ajahn Lee
Dhammadharo. I grew to find sustenance also in the great scholar-monks
of the modern Theravada---Venerables Ñāṇatiloka, Ñāṇapoṇika, Ñāṇamoḷī,
Guṇaratana, Bodhi, Narada, Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda, Buddhadasa, and many
others. I struggled to learn the broader history and nature of the
Buddhist schools and traditions from scholars such as I.B. Horner, T.W.
Rhys Davids, A.K. Warder and Étienne Lamotte. The knowledge and
understanding of all these people seemed so lofty, so confident and
capable. I devoured everything I could get my hands on.

It never really occurred to me that I might have something to add. I
could hardly even manage to master the basics. The masters of the
Buddhist tradition appeared as peerless savants, holders of an ancient
and impenetrable wisdom.

If you're sensing another plot twist, you're right again. Around 1994 I
was still a young resident at Wat Nanachat in north-east Thailand when
we received a guest, an elderly English gentleman who introduced himself
as Maurice Walshe. Of course, I knew that name very well: he had
translated the Dīgha Nikāya. I was so excited to meet one of my heroes.
He was a charming and witty man, and it was an honor for me to meet him
and spend some time together. I am always grateful to him because he
made me realize that the Buddhist tradition was created and formed by
ordinary people. He had studied Pali but did not regard himself as an
accomplished scholar. He undertook the translation at the behest of
Venerable Ānandamaitreya---another figure of legend for me. Maurice was
very humble about his abilities and his achievement. And it was no false
modesty; while his translation was eminently readable, it was not
especially accurate. But he did it. And in doing so, helped the Dhamma
take one more step forward.

It was after meeting Rod Bucknell and John Kelly, the co-founders of
SuttaCentral, in 2004, that I started making my own contributions to the
Dhamma through SuttaCentral. Modest as they were, I realized that my
talents and skills could help others, as I had been helped. It took a
long while, much learning and many trials, but eventually I dared
imagine that maybe I could make my contribution to the corpus of Pali
translations. It would surely be imperfect and inadequate, but perhaps I
had something to give.

Those of us who have enjoyed the sweet taste of the Dhamma owe a debt of
gratitude to all those who have made it possible; to all the teachers,
the supporters, the donors, the monks and nuns and layfolk, the
scholars, the meditators, the builders and cooks and plumbers and
weavers, the artists and storytellers, the repairers of leaky roofs and
the kindlers of lamps. There is not a single one who can hold the whole
tradition. But I believe that there is not a single one who has nothing
to offer.

Allow me to indulge in a further recollection of my days in the indie
music scene. One song that has stuck with me is *Song of the Siren*,
written by Tim Buckley, but known from the version by This Mortal Coil.
In three short verses it tells the story of the protagonist lost on
"shipless oceans", who was drawn in and given shelter by one they came
to love. Just as they thought they were safe, the beloved seemed to turn
away, leaving them "broken lovelorn on your rocks". Despairing and
confused, they considered ending it all. Until at last, they realized:
now it was their turn. They could not live forever relying on the other
to offer shelter and protection. When they were lost, they had been
saved, and now they called to the other, "swim to me, let me enfold
you".

As a person of faith, I believe that the Buddha was a perfected human
being. The Buddhist tradition, on the other hand, is made up of people
who are usually notably imperfect. Sometimes we feel inspiration and
uplift, other times disappointment or disillusionment. I reached a point
of frustration when I knew that, for all the efforts of many people, we
were still not able to make all the Suttas available in translation for
free. It seemed wrong, and I didn't know what to do. It was then that I
realized that it was my turn to offer shelter.

</article>

[]{#general_introduction.xhtml}

<article class="general-introduction" id="general_introduction">

# A Reader's Guide to the Pali Suttas

Bhikkhu Sujato, 2019

<nav class="contents">

1.  [About These Guides](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item1)
2.  [An Approachable
    Translation](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item2)
3.  [Plan Your Route or Wander in the
    Garden](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item3)
4.  [Looking Up References](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item4)
5.  [Elements of Structure](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item5)
6.  [In the Buddha's Day: A Time of
    Change](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item6)
7.  [Economics and Politics](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item7)
8.  [Social Life](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item8)
9.  [The Many Spiritual Paths of Ancient
    India](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item9)
10. [Cosmology](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item10)
11. [On the Pali Language](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item11)
12. [On the Pali
    Commentaries](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item12)
13. [A Brief and Incomplete Textual
    History](#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item13)

</nav>

The suttas of the Pali Canon (Tipiṭaka), especially the four main
*nikāyas*, are essential reading for anyone who wishes to understand the
Buddha and his teaching. They have been preserved and passed down in the
Pali language by the Theravāda tradition of Buddhism as the word of the
Buddha.

These texts were originally passed down orally, by generations of monks
and nuns who memorized them and recited them together. Around 30 BCE
they were written down in the Āluvihāra in Sri Lanka, and subsequently
were transmitted in manuscripts of palm leaves.

From the 19th century, the manuscripts were edited and published as
modern editions in sets of books. In addition, the Pali text was
translated into a number of modern languages, including Thai, Burmese,
Sinhalese, and English.

The word Tipiṭaka means "Three Baskets". The Basket of Discourses is
traditionally listed as the second of the three. The four *nikāyas* make
up the bulk of the Basket of Discourses. Here is how they are situated
within the canon as a whole.

- Vinaya Piṭaka (Basket of Monastic Law)
- Sutta Piṭaka (Basket of Discourses)
  - **Dīgha Nikāya** (Long Discourses)
  - **Majjhima Nikāya** (Middle Discourses)
  - **Saṁyutta Nikāya** (Linked Discourses)
  - **Aṅguttara Nikāya** (Numbered Discourses)
  - Khuddaka Nikāya (Minor Discourses)
- Abhidhamma Piṭaka (Basket of Systematic Treatises)

Similar collections are found in ancient Chinese translations, and
substantial portions of them are also in Sanskrit and Tibetan. The
diverse collections of scriptures arose among the Buddhist communities
who spread across greater India in the centuries following the Buddha,
especially under the Buddhist emperor, Ashoka. These missions are
documented in the ancient chronicles of Sri Lanka as well as the Vinaya
commentaries in Pali and Chinese, and have been partially corroborated
by modern archaeology.

SuttaCentral hosts almost all of these texts and provides comprehensive
parallels showing the relations between them. A comparative
understanding based on the full spectrum of these texts is essential for
any study of early Buddhism. The Chinese Buddhist canon, in particular,
contains a vast amount of translations of early texts, and in terms of
quantity it outweighs the Pali texts by some margin.

For many reasons, though, the Pali texts will always retain a special
place for those who wish to understand what the Buddha taught.

- They are the only complete set of scriptures of an early school of
  Buddhism.
- They are by far the largest body of texts to survive in an early Indic
  dialect.
- They are accompanied by an extensive and detailed set of ancient
  commentaries (*aṭṭhakathā*).
- They are, for the most part, linguistically clear, well-edited, and
  readily comprehensible.

Moreover, the Pali texts are the core scriptures of a living tradition,
the Theravāda school found in Sri Lanka, Thailand, Myanmar, Bangladesh,
Cambodia, Laos, India, China, and Vietnam. To this day they are recited,
taught, studied, and practiced daily, and are regarded in the traditions
as being a reliable witness to the teachings of the Buddha himself.

Among the Pali texts, it is the four *nikāyas* that command the most
attention. It is here that we find extensive and definitive explanations
of Buddhist teachings, as well as the living personality of the Buddha
and his immediate disciples.

By comparison, the Vinaya Piṭaka details the life of the monastic
communities, and in addition it reveals much about the history and
social background; but it contains only a few teaching passages. The
Abhidhamma Piṭaka is made up of systematic treatises that were composed
in the centuries following the Buddha's passing. And the books of the
Khuddaka Nikāya are very mixed. There are six fairly short books that
are supplements to the main four *nikāyas*, mostly in verse: the
[Dhammapada](https://suttacentral.net/dhp){.ref},
[Udāna](https://suttacentral.net/ud){.ref},
[Itivuttaka](https://suttacentral.net/iti){.ref}, [Sutta
Nipāta](https://suttacentral.net/snp){.ref},
[Theragāthā](https://suttacentral.net/thag){.ref}, and
[Therīgāthā](https://suttacentral.net/thig){.ref}. However, most of the
other books in the Khuddaka are later, and represent a phase of Buddhism
a few centuries after the Buddha.

## About These Guides {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item1}

I have prepared these guides in order to support a student who wishes to
develop a deeper understanding of the *nikāyas*. They accompany my
translations of the four *nikāyas* as found on SuttaCentral. This
general guide is meant to be read first, as it covers a variety of
issues that are common to all the *nikāyas*. The four *nikāyas* are a
highly unified body of texts, sharing most of the significant doctrinal
passages. The general information presented here is fleshed out in
individual essays on each of the four *nikāyas*, which highlight the
shifts in emphasis and orientation from one collection to the next.
These may be read in any order. While the guides for the specific
*nikāyas* naturally focus on the texts in that *nikāya*, this is not
adhered to rigidly, and they may refer also to passages found elsewhere.

Summaries of major doctrinal themes may be found mostly in the *nikāya*
guides, especially that for the Saṁyutta Nikāya, rather than here.
However, I would urge a degree of caution when it comes to summaries,
including my own. The true joy of the suttas is in the undigested
teachings, in that raw moment when the Buddha encounters a person in
suffering and helps them, not by giving them a digested abstract, but by
reaching out to them as people. Summaries and surveys are best treated
as starting points for discovery, rather than as definitive treatises.

I almost completely avoid sideways glances at the various Chinese and
other parallels. Understanding these relations is critical, and the
entire basis of SuttaCentral is founded on this fact. But the number of
texts is very large, and the complexity of the subject is daunting. I
fear that if I were to deal with parallels in any kind of depth, these
essays would never be completed; and if they were, they would have
become unreadably complex. Hence I have set myself a more manageable
scope, sticking to the Pali texts, on the understanding that most things
probably apply to the parallels as well. The reader can easily check the
parallels on SuttaCentral if they wish.

Among students of the suttas, the names of these collections are often
abbreviated to "Dīgha", "Majjhima", and so on, just as the word "Sutta"
is often omitted from sutta titles. Strictly speaking, it'd be best to
use the Pali title when referring to the original text, and the
translated title when referring to the translation; but this distinction
is often overlooked.

## An Approachable Translation {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item2}

In 2015 I determined to create freely available translations of the main
Pali discourses, so that all of these teachings might be made freely
available in a clear, consistent, and accurate rendition. My aim was to
translate the four main *nikāyas* as well as the 6 early books of the
Khuddaka Nikāya: Theragāthā, Therīgāthā, Udāna, Itivuttaka, Dhammapada,
and Suttanipāta. I did this so that these astonishing works of ancient
spiritual insight might enjoy the wider audience they so richly deserve.

In considering my translation style, I reflected on the standard trope
that introduces the prose suttas: a person "approaches" the Buddha to
ask a question or hear a teaching. It's one of those passages that
became so standard that we usually just pass it by. But it is no small
thing to "approach" a spiritual teacher. It takes time, effort,
curiosity, and courage; many of those people would have been more than a
little nervous.

How, then, would the Buddha respond when approached? Would he have been
archaic and obscure? Would he use words in odd, alienating ways? Would
you need to have another monk by your side, whispering notes into your
ear every second sentence---"He said this; but what he really meant
was..."?

I think not. I think that the Buddha would have spoken clearly, kindly,
and with no more complication than was necessary. I think that he would
have respected the effort that people made to "approach" his teachings,
and he would have tried the best he could, given the limitations of
language and comprehension, to explain the Dhamma so that people could
understand it.

An approachable translation expresses the meaning of the text in a
manner that is simple, friendly, and idiomatic. It should not just be
technically correct, it should sound like something someone might
actually say.

Which means that it should strive to dispense entirely with the
formalisms, technicalities, and Indic idioms that has dominated Buddhist
translations, into which English has been coerced by translators who
were writing for Indologists, linguists, and Buddhist philosophers. Such
translations are a death by a thousand papercuts; with each obscurity
the reader is distanced, taken out of the text, pushed into a mode of
acting on the text, rather than being drawn into it.

That is not how those who listened to the Buddha would have experienced
it. They were not being annoyed by the grit of dubious diction, nor were
they being constantly nagged to check the footnotes. They were drawn
inwards and upwards, fully experiencing the transformative power of the
Dhamma as it came to life in the words of the Awakened One. We cannot
hope to recapture this experience fully; but at least we can try to not
make things worse than they need to be.

At each step of the way I asked myself, "Would an ordinary person, with
little or no understanding of Buddhism, be able to read this and
understand what it is actually saying?" To this end, I have favored the
simpler word over the more complex; the direct phrasing rather than the
oblique; the active voice rather than the passive; the informal rather
than the formal; and the explicit rather than the implicit.

Still, it should not be thought that these are loose adaptations or
simplifications. There is a place for re-imaginings of ancient texts,
and for versions that strip the complexity to focus on the main point.
But my work is intended as a full and accurate translation, one that
omits nothing of substance. It is just that I try to express this
without undue complexity.

I still feel I am a long way from achieving my goal. No-one is more
aware than the translator of the compromises and losses along the way.
Consistency, clarity, correctness, and beauty all make their competing
claims, and only rarely, it seems, can all be met. It is a work in
progress, and I will probably be making corrections and adjustments for
many years to come.

I have been especially influenced in this approach by my fellow monks,
Ajahn Brahm and Ajahn Brahmali. It is from Ajahn Brahm that I have
learned the virtue of plain English; of the kindness of speaking such
that people actually understand. And with Ajahn Brahmali, who has been
working on Vinaya translations at the same time, I have had many
illuminating discussions about the meaning of various words and phrases.
He said one thing that stuck in my mind: a translation should mean
*something*. Even if you're not sure what the text means, we can be sure
that it had some meaning, so to translate it based purely on lexical
correspondences is to not really translate it at all. Say what you think
the text means, and if you make a mistake, fix it.

## Plan Your Route or Wander in the Garden {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item3}

The Buddha's teaching is a graduated one, leading from simple principles
to profound realizations. This pattern is found within almost all of the
discourses in one way or another. However it does *not* apply to the
collections of discourses. From collection to collection or discourse to
discourse there is no graduation in difficulty, no build up of assumed
knowledge in the student.

On the contrary, the Dīgha Nikāya begins with the Brahmajala Sutta,
while the Majjhima Nikāya begins with the Mūlapariyāya Sutta, both of
which are among the most profound and difficult discourses in the whole
canon. A student who dives in unwarily will suddenly find themselves in
very deep waters indeed.

If we wish to build up knowledge step by step, we can't rely on simply
reading the suttas in order. Students often find it helpful to use a
structured reading guide such as that offered here. On SuttaCentral, we
offer several other approaches.

Having said which, there's nothing wrong with simply plunging in at
random, so long as you don't expect everything to make sense at first.
Take your time and enjoy wandering about. Don't worry too much about
things that seem odd or unexpected. Usually you'll find that obscure or
difficult ideas are explained somewhere else; discovering those
unexpected connections is one of the joys of reading the suttas.

In these introductory essays, you will find many references to the
suttas. You don't need to look up each reference to understand the
essays. But if you do, you will get a reasonable survey of many
important texts, and learn how to find the passage that you need. I
suggest reading each essay on its own first, and then a second time,
looking up and reading the sutta references as you go.

## Looking Up References {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item4}

When you delve into sutta reading, you'll notice that texts and passages
are referenced in sometimes confusing ways. On SuttaCentral we employ a
simple and widely adopted form of semantic referencing. By "semantic"
references, we mean that the reference numbers are based on meaningful
divisions in the texts themselves.

For the four *nikāyas*, this means:

- In the Dīgha and Majjhima, texts are referenced by the ID for the
  collection (DN and MN respectively) and the sutta number, counted in a
  simple sequence from the beginning.
- In the Saṁyutta, the collection ID (SN), *saṁyutta* (thematic group),
  and sutta.
- In the Aṅguttara, the collection ID (AN), *nipāta* (numerical group),
  and sutta.

More granular referencing is provided by section numbers. These follow
pre-existing conventions:

- In the Dīgha, the section numbers of the PTS Pali edition, which have
  been widely adopted in translations.
- In the Majjhima, the section numbers introduced by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi,
  and used in Bhikkhu Bodhi's edition.
- In the Saṁyutta and Aṅguttara, the paragraph numbers as found in the
  Mahāsaṅgīti Pali text.

Each of these is further subdivided so that each section contains a
number of "segments", a short piece of text usually about a sentence or
so long. In my translations, the segments are matched with the
underlying Pali text.

In our system, the numbers following a colon represent the section and
segment numbers, that is, the subdivisions within a sutta. So, for
example:

- DN 3 means "the third discourse in the collection of Long Discourses
  (Dīgha Nikāya)".
- MN 43:3 means "discourse 43, section 3 in the collection of Middle
  Discourses (Majjhima Nikāya)".
- MN 43:3.7 means "discourse 43, section 3, segment 7 in the collection
  of Middle Discourses (Majjhima Nikāya)".
- SN 12.2:6.2 means "discourse 2, section 6, segment 2 in the 12th
  *saṁyutta* of the collection of Linked Discourses (Saṁyutta Nikāya)".

You may encounter various other referencing systems. In academic works,
texts are often referenced by volume and page of the Pali Text Society
(PTS) edition of the original Pali. This is a regrettable and clumsy
convention, since it binds references to a specific paper edition. I
hope it is swiftly abandoned in favor of proper semantic references.
However, the PTS volume/page numbers are displayed on SuttaCentral in
case you need to look up a legacy reference.

Traditionally, the texts were---and often still are---referenced the
long way: by *nikāya*, then *saṁyutta* or *nipāta* and/or *paṇṇasaka*
(as applicable), then *vagga* and *sutta*. This system is helpful when
using manuscripts, as you can narrow your search step by step through
the manuscript to find what you need. On the web, or even in books,
however, it is unnecessary. Nevertheless, you can use the traditional
navigation structure in our sidebar if you wish.

## Elements of Structure {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item5}

As students of Buddhist texts we are interested in the content, in
learning what the Buddha and his disciples had to say and how they
lived. However, due to the manner in which the texts are arranged, we
quickly discover that it's not easy to know how different texts relate
to each other. So while it may seem dry, it is worth spending a little
time to consider the *structure* of the texts.

Early Buddhist texts were organized, not for reading, but for oral
recitation and memorization. The overriding concern was to divide the
texts into chunks that could be memorized and recited together. Since
the texts were preserved in memory, they were largely "random access": a
skilled student could instantly recall a passage from anywhere in the
texts, without having to flip through the pages or look up an index. In
this way, the earliest system of organization is a little similar to how
we find information today through a search engine.

It follows from this that we cannot expect early Buddhist texts to be
structured sequentially like a modern book. But this does not mean that
the collections are random or chaotic. They follow their own logic,
which can be discerned if the texts are approached sympathetically.

Here are some of the structural or formal elements you will encounter in
the early Buddhist texts.

### Imagery and Narrative

The suttas frequently employ an ABA pattern. A statement is made; a
simile is given; and the statement is repeated.

This formal pattern is highly effective in reinforcing learning. First
we get the basic idea. But abstract philosophical or psychological
statements are hard to understand and remember without any context, so
the Buddha illuminates his teaching with a simile. He ends by driving
the message home once again.

The range of similes in the suttas is truly astounding. The Buddha had
an uncanny ability to effortlessly summon an apt comparison from
anything that he saw around him. The similes also convey a great deal of
incidental detail regarding life and culture in the Buddha's day, and,
more importantly, they show how the Dhamma teaching makes sense in its
context. Most of the classic Buddhist images that are familiar today
trace their roots to similes used by the Buddha in the early texts.

Sometimes the similes are extended to a brief parable or fable.
Curiously enough, however, we rarely see the Buddha engage in
story-telling of any length.

Where narratives are developed in some detail, they are typically as
part of the background story (*nidāna*) rather than in the Buddha's
teaching as such. It is an elementary principle of historical
scholarship that the background story is of a somewhat later date than
the main doctrinal material. Such stories vary considerably in the
parallels, showing that the traditions treated narrative more flexibly
than doctrine.

### Repetition

It won't take long before you notice that the suttas tend to be
repetitious. *Very* repetitious. This can be a major hurdle for a new
reader, so let's take a little time to consider what is happening.

Like so many patterns found in nature, the repetitions are *fractal*.
That is, they occur at every level: the word, the phrase, the sentence,
the paragraph, the passage, the whole text, even the group of texts.
This shows that the repetition is not something alien to these texts,
not something forced on them by an over-zealous editor, but is intrinsic
from the beginning.

But why? The thing to remember is that the texts were formed in an oral
tradition. And in an oral tradition, repetition works very differently
than it does in writing. When you *read* a repetition, it can be
annoying; it feels like a waste of time, and you want to skip over it.
But when *reciting*, repetition has exactly the opposite effect. It is
soothing and relaxing. The parts that are different take more work, you
have to exercise your memory; but when the repeated passage comes
around---like the chorus of a song---you relax into the flow of the
chanting. Repetitions give the reciter space to be at ease and
contemplate. Reciting a highly repetitive text becomes a form of
meditation, where you reflect the meaning and apply it to your
experience as you recite.

But in addition to this spiritual aspect, repetition has a definite
practical purpose: preservation. By saying the same thing again and
again, identically or with small variations, the reciters were
constantly checking their memories, ensuring the accuracy of the texts.
And if a text was lost, there is always another similar passage
somewhere else. Thus the repetitions ensured the long-term survival of
the Dhamma by creating backups of important information in multiple
places, retained in the minds of Buddhist practitioners.

Understanding the historical role of repetitions, however, doesn't help
us when we just want to read a sutta. What are we to do? Well, there is
no single way to read a sutta. Some people prefer to read them in full,
contemplating each repetition. Others read them more briefly, getting to
the important point. You'll figure out a way that suits you. But when
you understand the role of repetitions, hopefully you will not find them
such an obstruction.

### Abbreviation

The flipside of repetition is abbreviation. Since the repetitions are so
abundant, they are often abbreviated. Such abbreviation is not a modern
invention; it is found throughout the manuscripts, and indeed there is
no edition that fully spells out all the repetitions. The Pali texts
have their own convention for indicating abbreviations, marked with the
syllable *pe*, itself an abbreviation of *peyyāla*.

Generally speaking, the abbreviations in the Pali editions, and the
occasional instructions on how to spell out the full text, are sensible
and fairly consistent between editions. Modern translations follow the
manuscript tradition, but not slavishly. Sometimes the translation will
spell out abbreviated passages, or else abbreviate passages spelled out
in the original.

Abbreviations are both "internal" or "external". By internal
abbreviation, I mean that there is enough information in the text itself
to fully reconstruct it. Typically only the first and last items in a
list are spelled out in full, and for the rest, only the key terms are
mentioned. Here is an example from [SN
22.137](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.137){.ref}:

> Form is impermanent; you should give up desire for it. Feeling ...
> Perception ... Choices ... Consciousness is impermanent; you should
> give up desire for it.

In external abbreviations, an abbreviated passage cannot be fully
reconstructed from the context, but requires looking up another text to
fill in the blanks. This is another example of how the oral tradition
differs from written texts. A reciter would obviously know, say, the
formula for the four noble truths, so there is no need to write it every
time; just enough to jog the memory. But in modern editions, especially
on the web, a reader can access a specific text from anywhere, and may
never have encountered the abbreviated passage before. For this reason I
tried to reduce the number of external abbreviations in my translations.

### Titles

Buddhist manuscripts rarely have titles at the start like modern texts.
Rather, the title is recorded at the end. In modern editions, these
titles have been added at the start for clarity.

In many cases, especially in the titles of suttas and *vaggas*, what we
actually have in the manuscript is not really a title as such, but a key
word found in the summary verse (*uddāna*) found at the end of a *vagga*
or other division. These verses were inserted by the redactors of the
canon in order to help keep the contents organized, much like a Table of
Contents. However, the summary verses do vary to some extent between
editions, so the titles of suttas are not always consistent. In
addition, some suttas are assigned more than one title in the text
itself---for example [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Prime Net`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Brahmajālasutta`</cite>`{=html})---or
there are spelling variations. So take care, for it is quite common to
find different titles for the same text.

### Textual Divisions

#### Vagga ("Chapter")

The *vagga* is the most widespread and distinctive structural unit in
early Buddhist texts. It usually consists of ten texts, which may be ten
discourses, ten verses, ten rules, and so on. The number ten is adhered
to fairly consistently, although on occasion a *vagga* may contain more
or less than ten.

The *vagga* is often little more than a convenient grouping to help
organize the discourses neatly. In such cases, a *vagga* is usually just
named after its first discourse.

However, it is also common to find that a *vagga* collects discourses
with a loose thematic unity. For example, in the
[`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Chapter on the Full Spectrum of
Ethics`</cite>`{=html}](https://suttacentral.net/dn-silakkhandhavagga){.ref}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sīlakkhandhavagga`</cite>`{=html}) of
the Dīgha Nikāya (thirteen discourses in this case), almost all the
texts deal with the "gradual training" of ethics, meditation, and
wisdom.

In some cases, a *vagga* in Pali may parallel a similar *vagga* in
another language. For example, the famous
[`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Chapter of the
Eights`</cite>`{=html}](https://suttacentral.net/snp-atthakavagga){.ref}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Aṭṭhakavagga`</cite>`{=html}) of the
Sutta Nipāta exists in Chinese translation, though the Sutta Nipāta as a
whole does not. Similarly, the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sīlakkhandhavagga`</cite>`{=html} of
the Dīgha Nikāya has parallels in both the Dharmaguptaka (Chinese) and
Sarvāstivāda (Sanskrit) texts of the Dīgha.

Occasionally the word *vagga* is applied to a larger textual unit, one
that includes a number of sections, each of which composed of "little"
*vaggas*. Examples of such nested *vagga* structures include the
Saṁyutta Nikāya and the Khandhakas of the Pali Vinaya.

#### Paṇṇāsaka ("Fifty")

The word *paṇṇāsa* means "fifty", and a *paṇṇāsaka* is a group of
approximately fifty suttas, or five *vaggas*. It is used to organize
collections that contain many *vaggas*. Most of the collections with
large numbers of discourses use this structure, for example the
"[`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Root
Fifty`</cite>`{=html}](https://suttacentral.net/mn-mulapannasa){.ref}"
of the Majjhima Nikāya
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mūlapaṇṇāsa`</cite>`{=html}). The
*paṇṇāsaka* is purely for convenience and does not correspond to any
meaningful division of the text.

#### Nipāta ("Group")

The literal meaning of *nipāta* is "fallen down", and it is a generic
term for texts that have been placed together. In the Aṅguttara, it is
used for each division of texts gathered together by number: the [group
of discourses consisting of one
item](https://suttacentral.net/an1){.ref}, and so on. Elsewhere it is
used, for example, in the title of the [Sutta
Nipāta](https://suttacentral.net/snp%22%20class=%22text-root){.ref}, the
"Group of Discourses".

#### Saṁyutta ("Collection of Linked Discourses")

Whereas the *nipāta* is quite generic, the *saṁyutta* has a more
specific meaning: texts collected according to a similar theme or
subject matter. The Saṁyutta Nikāya consists of 56 such collections. For
example, the fourteenth *saṁyutta* contains [39 discourses on the topic
of the elements](https://suttacentral.net/sn14){.ref}.

#### Nikāya or Āgama ("Division")

The largest structural unit, usually known as *nikāya* in the Pali
tradition of the Theravāda, and as *āgama* in the northern traditions.
However, the term *āgama*, while it has fallen into disuse in modern
Theravāda, is found quite commonly in the Pali commentaries.

Collections similar to the four *nikāyas* as found in the Pali are found
in all the other schools. However, while the overall nature of the
collections is similar, and they are organized in similar ways, the
detailed content varies considerably. It frequently happens that a sutta
found in the Majjhima of one school, for example, may be found in the
Saṁyutta or Dīgha of another school. In addition, the internal sequence
of texts is quite different. Thus it seems that the *nikāyas* or
*āgamas* functioned more as organizational guidelines than as fixed
units.

The fifth Pali *nikāya*, the Khuddaka Nikāya, is more flexible and
varies more between traditions. It seems it originated as a place for
collecting verses and minor texts not gathered elsewhere. However the
Pali collection became a handy place to include later texts, so it has
now become the biggest of all the *nikāyas*. While there are occasional
references to a similar collection in the northern schools, none exist
in that form today. Nevertheless, many of the individual texts of the
Khuddaka have parallels, especially the Dhammapada, which survives in
many different editions.

## In the Buddha's Day: A Time of Change {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item6}

Each discourse begins with a brief statement saying that at "one time"
the Buddha was staying at a particular place. In this way the redactors
of the texts were concerned to locate the Buddha and his teachings in a
specific historical and cultural context. Modern scholars have been able
to reconstruct a fairly reliable picture of the Buddha's life and times,
relying on the early Buddhist texts, as well as what information may be
gleaned from Brahmanical and Jaina scriptures.

Archeology is, unfortunately, of limited use, as there are few
archeological remnants from the Buddha's day. In fact, before the time
of Ashoka---perhaps 150 years after the Buddha---there are very few
remains at all of ancient India, until the time of the Indic Valley
civilization, many centuries earlier. For the period we are interested
in, what has been found consists of some pottery and similar small
implements, as well as a few remnants of fortifications around Kosambī.
The paucity of evidence is due to two main reasons. The first is that
buildings at the time were mostly of wood or other perishable materials.
And the second is that archeological work in India has been very spotty
and incomplete.

The Buddha lived in the 5th century BCE in the Ganges plain in northern
India. The exact dates of his birth and death are uncertain, but modern
scholarly opinion tends to place his birth around 480 BCE and his death
80 years later at around 400 BCE. He was born in Lumbini and grew up in
Kapilavatthu, both of which belong to the Sakyan republic, straddling
the modern border of India and Nepal. His family name was Gotama; the
earliest texts do not mention his personal name, but tradition says it
was Siddhattha.

After his Awakening, the Buddha traveled about the Gangetic plain. The
area he traversed was part of the cultural/political region known as the
"sixteen nations" (*janapada*). This spanned from modern Delhi to the
north-west, the Bangladesh border to the east, the Himalayan foothills
to the north, the Deccan to the south, and Ujjain to the south-west.
Most of his time was spent around the cities of Sāvatthī in the kingdom
of Kosala and Rājagaha in the kingdom of Magadha. Despite the
proliferation of local legends in most Buddhist countries, the Buddha
never ventured outside this area.

It was not just the Buddha who was restricted to this region. It seems
that trade and other close cultural contacts normally took place within
this region, too. Occasional references to places further
afield---southern India or the Greeks---were vague and often legendary.
It was in the century after the Buddha passed away that the kingdoms of
northern India were unified and regular international trade routes were
opened, first to Europe, and, a couple of centuries later, to south-east
Asia and China.

## Economics and Politics {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item7}

Though cities and urban life feature prominently in the texts, they are
still on a small scale. The economy was largely rural, with farming
playing a prominent role.

However there are lists of occupations in the Pali canon that show a
diverse range of employment---accountants, jewelers, builders, soldiers,
doctors, government officials, and many more.

The rise in diversity of employment was linked to the growth of cities,
which in turn is associated with the appearance of new technologies. The
archeological record, though thin, has furnished us with records of two
significant innovations: forges for iron, and a kind of fine pottery
known as Northern Black Polished Ware. These new developments attest to
a growing mastery in the industrial use of fire, something that the
suttas mention in several memorable similes.

Technological innovation drove economic growth. We frequently hear of
wealthy individuals, employing large staffs and managing properties or
businesses. There was enough economic surplus to support a large class
of spiritual seekers. Such ascetics made no material contributions to
society; their value lay in spiritual and ethical development.

These technological and economic shifts were mirrored in the political
sphere. There were two major forms of governance. Traditional clans such
as the Sakyans or the Vajjians followed an ancient restricted form of
democracy, where decisions were made in a town council, and the clan
elected a leading member as temporary ruler. Other nations, like Kosala
and Magadha, had formed a more familiar kind of kingdom, with an
absolute hereditary monarch. While the Buddha evidently favored the
democratic ideals under which he grew up, and after which he modeled the
governance of the Sangha, it was the kingdoms that were growing in
economic and military dominance. During the Buddha's lifetime, there
were repeated skirmishes between Kosala and Magadha, vying for dominion
over the ancient sacred city of Varanasi.

Of even greater significance, towards the end of his life, Magadha was
announcing its intentions to invade the Vajjian republic. History
attests to the success of this policy: in the decades following the
Buddha's death, Magadha conquered virtually all of the sixteen nations,
establishing an unquestioned supremacy over the region, and establishing
pan-Indian trade networks. So powerful was the resulting kingdom that
Alexander the Great's troops rebelled at the mere rumor of Magadhan
military might.

## Social Life {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item8}

The growing complexity of economic and political life required
corresponding changes in social roles and responsibilities. Like any
society in a time of change, people in the time of the Buddha were
trying to balance their traditional values and structures with the new
realities. It seems that people were for the most part reasonably well
off. Still, poverty and famine, along with injustice, banditry, and
economic uncertainty, were present and posed a very real threat. We hear
frequent laments about how unpredictable wealth is, whether the older
forms of wealth in cattle and land, or the newer forms in money and
career.

The Buddha was not a social revolutionary and did not overtly agitate
for an overthrow of social systems, even those he recognized as unjust.
Typically he would argue for a more just and fair implementation of
existing norms. For example, rather than saying all societies should be
democratic, he spoke of the moral duty of a king to look after his
people.

A man was expected to earn a living so as to maintain and protect his
family. He should use his earnings to provide his family with both
essentials and luxuries, and to treat workers with kindness and decency,
while not neglecting to assign some funds for savings, and some for
donations to charity.

A woman's traditional role was to marry and bear children. Aside from
this, her options were limited. We rarely hear of professional women
aside from sex workers. In this context, the opportunity to become a nun
allowed women to pursue their own spiritual and intellectual
development, to act as leaders and teachers, and to be respected and
supported in that role.

Many of the more extreme manifestations of sexual discrimination are not
found in the early texts. We find no mention of child brides, immolation
of widows, or the essential subjugation of women to men.

India had not yet developed a full-fledged caste system. But there was a
much simpler fourfold division of society:

Aristocrats (*khattiya*)
:   Owners of land (*khetta*), typically wealthy and powerful, engaged
    in statecraft, war, and production. The Buddha was from an
    aristocratic clan. The aristocrats placed themselves at the highest
    tier of society.

Brahmins (*brāhmaṇa*)
:   Members of a hereditary priestly class. The brahmins were custodians
    of sacred texts called "Vedas", and performed rituals and ceremonies
    to their various deities. However by the time of the Buddha many
    brahmins were simply engaged in ordinary worldly livelihoods and
    their religious role was secondary. They believed themselves to be
    the children of God (Brahmā).

Merchants (*vessa*):
:   Engaged in trade and commerce.

Workers (*sudda*)
:   Performed physical labor.

Not everyone fit into this neat scheme. We hear reference to outcastes
and various tribal peoples. In addition, there were slaves or bonded
servants. Finally, the ascetics (*samaṇa*) such as the Buddha saw
themselves as having left behind all such notions of caste.

## The Many Spiritual Paths of Ancient India {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item9}

Change in the Buddha's day was not limited to the worldly sphere. The
religious life of ancient India was equally dynamic. For this reason it
would be a mistake to assume that India in the time of the Buddha was
primarily a Hindu society. Some of the elements that make up modern
Hinduism may be discerned, but Indian religion, like spiritual and
religious practice everywhere, has always been in a state of flux and
evolution.

In the time of the Buddha, and indeed even to this day, the ancient
pre-Buddhist Vedas formed the basis for the spiritual life of the
brahmins and those who followed them. Rituals such as the *agnihotra*,
the daily pouring of ghee onto the fire as an offering to the fire-god
Agni---originated long before the Aryan people even came to India, and
continue to be performed today.

Nevertheless, many of the old gods featured in the Vedas had vanished by
the time of the Buddha, and many of the famed deities of later Hinduism
had not yet appeared. Those who do appear take on a markedly different
aspect; prominent gods such as Vishnu (Pali: *Veṇhu*) or Shiva (Pali:
*Siva*) appear in minor roles, and a warrior like Sakka (AKA Indra)
appears as an apostle of peace. There were no temples, no images, and no
cult of devotion (*bhakti*). There is no mention of a system of
*avatars*, nor of familiar concepts from modern Hindu-inspired
spirituality such as *śakti*, *kuṇḍalinī*, chakras, or yoga exercises.

Moreover, when we look at the aspects of modern Hinduism that were
present at the time, many of them are completely separate from each
other. No-one considered, for example, the worship of a local dragon
(*nāga*) to have anything to do with the rites of the brahmins. The
outstanding feature of Hinduism---the great synthesis of religious and
philosophical ideas and practices, from simple animism to profound
non-dualism---had not yet been undertaken. Different strands of
religious life were quite distinct and were not considered to be part of
the same path.

Thus historians do not refer to the brahmanical religion of the time as
Hinduism, but rather as Vedism or Brahmanism. It was nearly a thousand
years later that the movement recognizable as modern Hinduism became
prominent in India. To be sure, much of Hinduism is drawn from the
Vedas, in the same way that much of Catholicism is drawn from the Hebrew
scriptures that Christians call the Old Testament. But were you to meet
Abraham or Noah and address them as "Catholics", they would not know
what you are talking about. And the Indians of the Buddha's time would
have been equally unfamiliar with the very idea of "Hinduism".

All this notwithstanding, there is an oft-repeated claim to the effect
that the Buddha "was born, lived, and died a Hindu", attributed to the
great pioneer of Indology, Thomas Rhys Davids. While it is true that he
did write this, it was in an early work, page 116 of
`<cite class="book">`{=html}Buddhism: its history and
literature`</cite>`{=html}, a lecture series published in 1896. But by
1912 his views had changed, for on page 83 of
`<cite class="book">`{=html}Buddhism: Being a sketch of the life and
teachings of Gautama, the Buddha`</cite>`{=html}, he said:

> Gautama was born, and brought up, and lived, and died a typical
> Indian. Hinduism had not yet, in his time, arisen.

Rhys Davids emphasizes that the Buddha did not have an antagonistic
relation to the Brahmanical religion. His purpose was not religious
reform, but freedom from suffering. However, on page 85 of the same work
he comments:

> In the long run the two systems were quite incompatible. ... Gautama's
> whole training lay indeed outside of the ritualistic lore of the
> Brahmanas and the brahmins. The local deities of his clan were not
> Vedic.

The lesson here is that we must avoid reading modern conditions back
into ancient times. The peoples of ancient India had their own rich,
complex, and many-faceted spiritual lives. We can only begin to
understand them, and to understand how the Buddha related to them, when
we set aside our modern preconceptions and preoccupations and listen to
what they had to say for themselves.

An outstanding feature of early Buddhist texts is interreligious
dialogue. The Buddha did not live in a Buddhist culture. We frequently
encounter the Buddha and his disciples discussing various aspects of
spiritual philosophy and practice with followers of other spiritual
paths, or with people of no particular path. Sometimes they would come
to the Buddha seeking to learn or even to attack. And it is not uncommon
to find the Buddha and his disciples actively seeking out followers of
other spiritual paths simply to engage in conversation. In this, the
early texts are quite different from later Buddhist literature, which
almost always consists of Buddhists speaking with other Buddhists.

While many of these people ended up declaring themselves followers of
the Buddha, this was not the purpose of the dialogue. The Buddha did not
debate simply to win an argument, but out of compassion, to help
alleviate suffering.

Amid the complex sets of religious practices, we may discern three major
domains.

### Animism

In the villages and towns of ancient India, the most widespread folk
religion was a belief in the omnipresent reality of spirits in nature.
Such deities might embody aspects of the weather, or live in plants or
rivers or caves; they might promote abundance, or take ferocious and
threatening forms. They were unreliable, but could be wooed through
simple offerings of rice, flowers, or ghee.

Animist beliefs were derived from local legends and rituals, not from
religious philosophy. However, the higher religious paths such as
Buddhism or Jainism, rather than repressing such beliefs, were happy to
assign them a minor role in the scheme of things, so long as they
eliminated harmful practices like human or animal sacrifice.

Throughout the Buddhist texts, we hear of *yakkhas* (spirits), *nāgas*
(dragons), *gandhabbas* (fairies), *garudas* (phoenixes), and many more.
The Buddhist attitude towards such beings might best be described as
"good neighborliness". Neither they, nor any higher beings, are
worshiped or looked to for salvation. Rather, they are treated with
respect and dignity, for who knows? If they are real, it would be good
to have them on your side.

### Brahmanism

The caste who called themselves "brahmins" inherited an ancient body of
sacred lore known as the Vedas. This consisted of sets of oral
scriptures, among which the Ṛg Veda was primary. In the early Buddhist
texts there are three Vedas: Ṛg, Sāma, and Yajur; the Atharva is
mentioned, but was not yet considered to be a Veda.

The Ṛg Veda grew out of the cultural and religious milieu of the ancient
Indo-European peoples. It shares a common heritage with the Avestan
texts of Iranian Zoroastrianism, and more distantly, the mythologies of
Europe.

It seems that Indo-European peoples moved into India around a millennium
before the Buddha, with distinct clans maintaining sets of sacred lore.
In the early centuries of the first millennium BCE, in the area known as
the Kuru country (modern Delhi), the clans were unified into the
classical brahmanical kingdom whose story is echoed in the Mahābharata.
The Ṛg Veda was forged from the books of the clans, wrapped in opening
and closing chapters emphasizing unity. By the time of the Buddha, the
brahmanical culture and language had already become strongly established
in the regions further south and east where the Buddha lived.

The brahmins insisted on the holiness of their caste, the efficacy of
their rituals, the truth of their scriptures, and the omnipotence of
their deity. The Buddha rejected all these claims out of hand.

However, Brahmanical traditions were far from a unified monolith. We see
a strong strand of questioning of tradition, of seeking out new ways, of
earnest seeking of the truth; and such attitudes are just as strong in
the Brahmanical texts as the Buddhist.

Brahmins were typically family men, living a settled life, and expecting
a degree of social respect and standing due to their learning and caste.
But some brahmins had adopted an ascetic lifestyle, apparently
influenced by the *samaṇas*.

In the generations preceding the Buddha, brahmanical philosophy had
reached a peak in the Upaniṣads, with their sophisticated debates and
mystic philosophy of the essential unity of self and cosmos. These texts
form the immediate dialectical context of the Buddha's philosophy.
Yājñavalkya, a key Upaniṣadic philosopher, lived around Mithilā, in the
same region traversed by the Buddha, no more than a century or two
before him. Some early Upaniṣads are apparently referred to in [DN
13](https://suttacentral.net/dn13){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Three
Knowledges`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Tevijjasutta`</cite>`{=html}), and the
Upaniṣadic doctrine of "self" (*ātman*) was prominently rejected by the
Buddha in his most distinctive teaching: not-self (*anattā*).

### The Samaṇas

Quite distinct from the brahmins, and often in opposition to them, was a
complex set of religious movements known as the *samaṇas* or "ascetics".
Six prominent ascetic schools were acknowledged in the time of the
Buddha. The Buddha counted himself as an ascetic, too, in view of the
many similarities between his own movement and theirs.

Like the Buddhist mendicants, the other *samaṇas* were typically
celibate renunciates, living either in solitude or in monastic
communities, and relying on alms for food. The most famous
movement---and the only one to survive until today---was Jainism, which
flourished under their leader Mahāvīra, known as Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta in
the Buddhist texts.

The ascetics shared an iconoclastic attitude, and all rejected the
brahmanical system *in toto*. However they varied amongst each other, as
shown in their teachings attested at [DN
2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Fruits of the Ascetic
Life`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sāmaññaphalasutta`</cite>`{=html}) as
well as [MN 60](https://suttacentral.net/mn60){.ref} and [MN
76](https://suttacentral.net/mn76){.ref}. Some emphasized austerities
and self-mortification, others rationality and debate. Some advocated
ardent effort, others a resigned fatalism. Some taught rebirth, while
others asserted that this material world was the only reality.

While their doctrines may appear florid and obscure, and their practices
sometimes bizarre and pointless, the ascetic movements are a lasting
testament to the diversity, vigor, and innovation of religious life in
ancient India.

## Cosmology {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item10}

A recurring theme in many of the religious strands of India is a concern
for cosmology. A religious philosophy was expected to paint a picture of
the world on a large scale and indicate humanity's role within it. Like
all aspects of religious life, such cosmologies were partly shared
across traditions and in part were unique to each tradition.

Some traditions asserted a materialist cosmology, rejecting the notion
that one would be reborn in any other state, and asserting that only
this life was real.

Most cosmologies, however, posited multiple realms of existence. Beings
would come and go from these different stations. Some were pleasant and
desirable, while others were not. As to why this was so, different
reasons were given.

- Some ascetics argued that beings transmigrated due to destiny or
  chance.
- Mainstream Brahmanical traditions said it was due to the performance
  of rituals and sacrifices to the gods.
- Some said that rebirth was determined by intentional actions, whether
  moral or immoral.

The latter view was held by some ascetic schools, such as Buddhism and
Jainism, and some of the more advanced and innovative threads of
Brahmanism. These traditions shared a conception of transmigration that
in many ways is quite similar. Three common elements can be discerned:

1.  All sentient beings are reborn countless times in process called
    *saṁsāra* ("transmigration").
2.  This process is driven by ethical choices (*kamma*). Good deeds lead
    to a pleasant rebirth; bad deeds lead to a painful rebirth.
3.  True salvation is not found in any realm of existence, but only in
    liberation from transmigration itself.

While these aspects of the cosmology were shared, the details differed
in both theory and practice.

Jain and Brahmanical theory proposed that transmigration was undergone
by a soul or self which could attain freedom. For the Jains, the
individual soul (*jīva*) attains eternal purity and bliss. For the most
sophisticated among the brahmins, the individual self (*ātman*) realizes
its true nature as identical with the divinity that is the cosmos itself
(Sanskrit: *tat tvam asi*; Pali: *eso hasmasmi*; *so attā so loko*).

The Buddha rejected all such metaphysical notions of self or soul.
Instead, he explained transmigration as an ongoing process of changing
conditions, formulated as the famous twelve links of dependent
origination (*paṭicca samuppāda*).

In the practical application of their theory, Jains believed that the
way to salvation was to firstly avoid harming any sentient beings, even
unintentionally, and then to burn off past *kamma* through painful
self-mortification. Such practices are described frequently and in
detail, attesting to their prominence in early Indian spiritual life.

The brahmins, as seen in the suttas, did not have such a clear and
unambiguous path to a highest goal, and indeed are depicted as arguing
among themselves as to the correct path. This reflects the historical
situation, where the earlier, simpler, and more worldly goals of Vedic
Brahmanism were growing into a more sophisticated Upaniṣadic form.

For the Upaniṣads, the key to salvation was understanding. It is only
one who understands the rituals and philosophies correctly (*ya evam
veda*) who will experience their full benefit. In the centuries prior to
the Buddha, this path of wisdom had developed into a profound
contemplative culture, expressed in the ecstatic and mystical passages
of the Upaniṣads.

The Buddha shared the Jain concern for avoiding harm, but rejected the
practice of extreme austerities. Rather than bodily torment, he
emphasized mental development.

Certain Brahmanical lineages had developed meditation to a high degree,
but meditative states were still conceived in metaphysical terms. The
Buddha adopted such meditations for their value in purifying the mind,
but interpreted them in purely psychological terms, rejecting
metaphysics entirely.

One of the benefits of advanced meditation was that a practitioner would
develop the ability to perceive many past lives and many realms into
which beings may be reborn. In this, we may distinguish between the core
doctrinal texts, which typically speak of rebirth in general terms as
good or bad destinies, and the narrative portions, which depicted the
realms of rebirth in terms familiar from popular Indian cosmology.

The early texts do not attempt to systematize these realms in any great
detail. Indeed, the various deities and realms mentioned defy any simple
categorization. Later Buddhism developed a theory of various realms,
sometimes called the 31 planes of existence, but this does not fully
represent the situation as found in the early texts.

Here is a general overview of the most important realms found in the
suttas. It is crucial to remember that, in the Buddhist view, all of
these, even the most high, are impermanent and do not constitute true
freedom. They are not separate metaphysical planes, but mere stations in
which consciousness may spend some time during its long journey.

Brahmā realms
:   The highest heavens, which correspond to attainments of absorption
    meditation (*jhāna*), and may only be attained by *jhāna*
    practitioners. The Brahmā realms include the realms of luminous form
    (*rūpaloka*) and the formless realms (*arūpaloka*). The former are
    attained by means of the four primary absorptions. In this context,
    the word "form" refers to the refined and radiant echo or reflection
    of the original meditation subject upon which these states are
    based. The formless states lie beyond this, and are realized when
    even that subtle luminosity disappears.

Heavens of sensual pleasures
:   Many of these are mentioned, most commonly the realm of the
    Thirty-Three, governed by Sakka. Various beings from Indian animist
    beliefs are said to inhabit the lower tiers of these realms.

Human realm
:   The most important realm, where Buddhas appear and the spiritual
    path is taught.

Lower realms
:   These include the animal realm, the ghost realm, and the hells. The
    realm of the *asuras*---titans or demons---is usually placed here in
    the later cosmologies, but the early texts seem to treat it as one
    of the heavens.

The Buddha taught that doing good and avoiding bad was the path to
rebirth in one of the fortunate realms, which include the human realm
and all higher realms. However, the course of transmigration is long and
unpredictable, so no heaven realm provides a sure refuge.

Far from teaching rebirth as a solace for naive followers unable to face
the inevitability of death, rebirth is depicted in traumatic and
terrifying terms: the tears that one has shed in the endless course of
transmigration are greater than all the waters in all the oceans of the
world. Thus the true significance of doing good deeds is not merely to
get a better rebirth, but to lay the foundations for higher spiritual
development, primarily through meditation.

In the core teaching of the four noble truths, the origin of all
suffering is traced to the craving that is connected with rebirth
(*yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobbhavikā*). The practice of the noble eightfold path
is the only thing that enables one to let go of that craving and be free
of suffering. This is what the Buddha called "extinguishment" or
"quenching" (Pali: *nibbāna*; Sanskrit *nirvāṇa*).

## On the Pali Language {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item11}

Theravāda Buddhist texts are written in Pali. This ancient Indic
language can be thought of as a simplified cousin of Sanskrit. Here are
some well-known words in both languages.

- Sanskrit *karma* is Pali *kamma*.
- Sanskrit *dharma* is Pali *dhamma*.
- Sanskrit *bodhisattva* is Pali *bodhisatta*.
- Sanskrit *nirvāṇa* is Pali *nibbāna*.
- Sanskrit *bhikṣuṇī* is Pali *bhikkhunī*.

Pali belongs to the Indo-European language family, which was introduced
to India perhaps a millennium or so before the Buddha with the
Indo-European (or "Āryan") incursions. It was subsequently enriched by a
large number of words adopted from local languages, primarily Dravidian
and Munda. Pali or closely related languages were used across the
greater Gangetic plain in the cultural and economic region identified by
the use of Northern Black Polished Ware.

Despite its great antiquity, Pali is a well studied and clearly defined
language. This is because the ancient Indians developed an advanced
science of linguistics, which is already mentioned in the earliest Pali
texts. Within a few generations of the Buddha, these were synthesized
and standardized by Pāṇini in his Sanskrit grammar, the Aṣṭādhyāyī, a
comprehensive technical treatise which is perhaps the greatest
intellectual achievement in the secular sciences of ancient times.
Pāṇini's methods were later adapted to create Pali grammars, which
remain the basis for the study of Pali to this day. The Theravāda
tradition has always prided itself on its commitment to precision and
care in matters of language and scripture, with the result that the
canonical Pali texts are, for the most part, well edited, clear, and
consistent.

Pali is a highly inflected language, which means that the forms of words
are adapted to indicate such things as gender, number, case, and the
like. This makes the study of Pali grammar quite intensive, but it also
helps in parsing out the structure of sentences.

The name of the language can be a little confusing. The Theravāda
commentaries say they are written in Māgadhī, "the language of Magadha".
For them, *pāḷi* means "text", i.e. the canonical scripture as opposed
to commentary. In modern times, however, the language of the Theravāda
scriptures has come to be called Pali, while the dialect of the Ashokan
pillars is called Māgadhī. I follow these modern conventions.

The historical origins of Pali are a matter of ongoing academic
research, which I will not go into here. Tradition holds that Pali was
spoken by the Buddha, and this is surely true in the sense that what he
spoke would have been closer to Pali than any other known language, with
the possible exception of Ashokan Māgadhī.

In my view, the least persuasive theory is that the Buddha spoke a
single consistent language all the time. This is so implausible as to be
virtually impossible; it's just not how language works. In ancient times
language was highly diverse, with different accents and dialects
sometimes from one village to the next. The process of language
standardization is slow and uncertain, and it is still common to adapt
languages per context. In Thailand, for example, it is normal for monks
from the north-east to speak to the villagers in their local Isaan
language---which itself varies regionally---and to visitors from Bangkok
in central Thai. In Malaysia, monks might switch between English,
Hokkien, and Mandarin in a single talk. Even those who know only one
language use context-switching all the time, adapting vocabulary,
accent, and grammar to accommodate speaking with people of different
classes, generations, or language communities.

This problem was addressed by the Buddha himself in the
Araṇavibhaṅgasutta ([MN
139:12.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn139){.ref}), and he could not have
made his policy more clear.

> "How do you not insist on local terminology and not override normal
> usage? It's when in different localities the same thing is known as a
> 'plate', a 'bowl', a 'cup', a 'dish', a 'basin', a 'tureen', or a
> 'porringer'. And however it is known in those various localities, you
> speak accordingly, thinking: 'It seems that the venerables are
> referring to this.'"

Unless the Buddha failed to follow his own advice, we can assume that he
adopted local dialects in his journeys, just as anyone else would. In
his travels from Nepal to the Deccan, from Bengal to Delhi, and in his
conversations with folks from all walks of life, from outcastes to
brahmins and kings, he would have used language that fitted his context.
This is more apparent in literary forms than in linguistic variation.
Verse forms in particular are strongly correlated with educated and
elite classes: deities, brahmins, and kings.

The language we call Pali has been standardized and streamlined to some
degree, while not eliminating all traces of its dialectical origins. I
think the specific features of Pali are likely to be influenced by the
language of Avanti, the home town of Mahinda son of Ashoka, who first
brought the texts to Sri Lanka. This historical problem is really of
most interest to linguists, since the differences between these dialects
are minor. Understanding of the dialectical situation can help to clear
up some tricky problems, but does not affect the vast majority of Pali
passages which are perfectly clear.

In modern times the study of Pali remains popular in Theravāda Buddhism,
and any serious student will pick up some technical vocabulary. However,
as my father used to warn me, "A little knowledge is a dangerous thing."
There are people who learn a few terms and ideas and think this grants
them the expertise to discard 2,500 years of sophisticated linguistic
learning. Some even start their own schools and teachings based on
nothing more than silly linguistic mistakes. I've been studying,
memorizing, reciting, translating, and teaching Pali for half my life,
and I still learn something new most every day. If you want to set out
on the journey of exploring Pali, make sure to stash plenty of patience
and humility along with the curiosity in your backpack.

Pali is written phonetically, which means that the way it is spelled
matches how it sounds. This has been the case since the beginning, as
even the first Indic script, Brāhmī, is phonetic. Brāhmī, which is first
attested in the Ashokan edicts, became the source of all later Indic
scripts, as well as those of south and south-east Asia such as Thai,
Sinhala, Lanna, Khmer, and Myanmar. Over time, Pali came to be written
in all these scripts.

These phonetic scripts were made possible by the linguistic science of
the ancient pandits, which precisely defined the value of each sound.
Despite this, the popular pronunciation of Pali varies from place to
place. This is because local Buddhist traditions use different
transliteration systems influenced by the national languages, and the
sound of letters in Pali does not always match the sound of the same
letter in the local language. Thus *buddha* in Pali is pronounced
*budda* in Sinhala, *phuttha* in Thai, and *booda* in American English.
Nonetheless, scholars of every nation are well aware of the correct
pronunciation.

In the nineteenth century, various schemes for representing Pali and
Sanskrit in Roman characters were developed. Scholars such as Sir Muthu
Coomaraswamy urged the adoption of a standardized Romanization so that
international scholars could easily read texts from the different
regions. Such a unified standard for transliteration of Sanskrit and
Pali was formalized in 1894 in Geneva at the International Congress of
Orientalists. This became widely used by international scholars, and
with minor emendations was adopted as ISO 15919 in 2001. Due to the
strictly mechanical nature of such phonetic representations,
SuttaCentral is able to show Pali texts in dozens of scripts, powered by
the Aksaramukha conversion utility.

The pronunciation of Pali is quite simple. The ancient grammars clearly
define the places and manner of articulation in the mouth. Vowels are
pure monophthongs, not dipthongs; that is, the sound remains fixed
throughout and does not glide while being articulated. Most vowels in
many varieties of English are pronounced with some degree of
dipthongalization, so native English speakers should train to remove
this by pronouncing each vowel with the mouth held still. With this
qualification, here are approximate vowel equivalents in English.

a
:   short: *lal* = "lull"

ā
:   long: *lā* = "lah"

i
:   short: *thil* = "till"

ī
:   long: *thī* = "tea"

u
:   short: *phul* = "pull"

ū
:   long: *cū* = "chew"

o
:   long: *so* = "so" (short before double consonants)

e
:   long: *jel* = "jell" (short before double consonants)

Consonants are all pronounced distinctly and not combined. The
twenty-five main consonants follow a systematic pattern: there are five
points of articulation in the mouth, and at each point there are five
possible letters varied by aspiration and voicing, as well as a liquid
consonant. In addition there are a few miscellaneous consonants.

guttural: back of the mouth
:   *k*, *kh*, *g*, *gh*, *ṅ*

palatal: middle of the tongue on the roof of the mouth
:   *c*, *ch*, *j*, *jh*, *ñ*

retroflex: tongue-tip curled to touch the roof
:   *ṭ*, *ṭh*, *ḍ*, *ḍh*, *ṇ*

dental: tongue touches the base of the teeth
:   *t*, *th*, *d*, *dh*, *n*

labial: at the lips
:   *p*, *ph*, *b*, *bh*, *m*

miscellaneous
:   *y*, *r*, *l*, *ḷ*, *v*, *s*, *h*, *ḷh*, *ṁ*

The only ambiguous sign is *h*. By itself or when following most soft
consonants it is equivalent to the English *h*. Thus *haṁ* is English
"hung", while *amhā* would be "umm, hah". When following a hard
consonant or the letter *ḷ*, *h* is a sign of aspiration, not a separate
letter. It is realized as a puff of air following the letter.

Most unvoiced consonants in English are aspirated, whereas Pali has both
aspirated and unaspirated variants. We can emulate this by taking
advantage of the fact that in English we drop the aspiration when
following *s*. Thus *t* is pronounced like *t* in "still", while *th* is
like *t* in "till". Likewise for *p* in "spill" versus *ph* in "pill",
and *k* in "skill" versus *kh* in "kill". *C* is like *ch* in "beach",
while *ch* is like *chh* in "beachhouse". Note that Pali does not have
the fricative sounds spelled in English with *f* or *ph*, as well as
*th* as in "thing" or "there". *Th* is an aspirated *t*, and *ph* is an
aspirated *p*.

Voiced aspirated consonants (*gh*, *jh*, *ḍh*, *dh*, *bh*) are not found
in English, but they can be approximated by combining words such as
"bigheart" or "madhouse".

Doubled consonants are always pronounced, such "big gun", or "sad dad".
Before a double consonant, a long vowel is shortened.

Retroflex consonants are not found in English, but the effect is similar
to the American *r*. Thus Pali *pāṭi* is similar to the American
pronunciation of "party".

Finally, *v* is soft like *w*, *r* is like *r* in American English, and
*s* is pure sibilant (*sū* is "sue" not "zoo"). *Ṁ*, known as
*anusvāra*, nasalizes the preceding vowel, but in practice it is usually
pronounced as the *ng* in "sing".

## On the Pali Commentaries {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item12}

The Pali canonical texts are accompanied by an extensive and detailed
set of commentaries (*aṭṭhakathā*) and subcommentaries (*ṭīkā*). These
texts are, for most people, even more mysterious than the canon itself,
so let me say a few words on them.

The main commentaries were compiled by the monk Buddhaghosa at the
Mahāvihāra monastery in Anuradhapura, then the capital of Sri Lanka, in
the 5th century. Buddhaghosa inherited a series of older commentaries in
the old Sinhalese language, now lost. These had been compiled over the
centuries in Sri Lanka, mostly between around 200 BCE--200 CE; that is
to say, the main content of the commentaries was closed several
centuries before Buddhaghosa.

It was all a bit messy, with text in Pali and commentaries in Sinhala,
and a variety of different commentarial texts. Buddhaghosa aimed to
streamline the situation by combining all the old commentaries into a
single system, translated into Pali.

Buddhaghosa's work remains as an extraordinary accomplishment of
traditional scholarship. He had an almost preternatural mastery of his
materials, and the clarity and rigor of his writings make light work of
what must have been an exceedingly difficult task. It is crucial to
remember that he saw his work as that of an editor, compiler, and
translator. That is what he claimed to be doing, and from everything we
know about his work, he was a scholar of integrity who did exactly what
he said. When he felt a need to express his own opinion he said so; but
such interventions were rare and hesitant. The commentaries are the
record of discussions and explanations of the Pali texts handed down in
the Mahāvihāra tradition, not the opinions of Buddhaghosa.

While Buddhaghosa compiled commentaries on the major texts, he left some
incomplete. It is not always certain which commentaries were by him; but
in any case later scholars completed his work. Subsequently,
subcommentaries were written to clarify obscure points in the
commentaries.

In modern Theravāda, the commentaries have become a sadly and
unnecessarily divisive issue. Some people take the entire tradition
uncritically and regard the commentaries as essentially infallible.
Others flip to an extreme of suspecting anything in the commentaries,
rewriting Theravādin history as a conspiracy of the commentaries. But
any serious scholar knows that the commentaries are often helpful, even
indispensable, on countless difficult and obscure points. Without them,
there is no way we would have been able to create the accurate
dictionaries and translations that we have today. Yet they cannot be
relied on blindly, for, like any resource, they are fallible, and must
be read with a careful and critical eye. On some doctrinal issues, the
position of the commentaries had shifted considerably from the stance in
the suttas, and not in illuminating ways.

I once read some advice from a Burmese Sayadaw---I am afraid this was
many years ago and I have forgotten who it was---on how to use the
commentaries. He said---and I paraphrase---something like this. First
read the sutta. Try to understand it. Read it and meditate on it again
and again. If there's anything you don't understand, see if it can be
explained elsewhere in the suttas. If, at the end of the day, you still
cannot understand it, check the commentary. If it answers the question,
good. But if, after equally careful study, the commentary is still
unclear, then check the subcommentary.

This has always seemed like sound advice to me, and I have tried to
follow it. The purpose of the commentary is to help explain the suttas.
Where the suttas are clear---and mostly they are---there is no need to
refer to the commentary. The only extra thing I would add is that, in
addition to the commentaries and subcommentaries, we now also have
Chinese and Sanskrit parallels to help us understand difficult passages.

In these guides, I almost completely leave aside the commentarial
explanations. In several places the explanations I have given differ
from those in the commentaries. I am aware of this, and have written on
most of these things elsewhere, but I do not want to burden the guides
by re-litigating every controversy. I don't contradict the commentaries
out of ignorance or stubbornness, but because after many years of study,
contemplation, discussion, and practice, I have come to see some things
differently.

## A Brief and Incomplete Textual History {#general_introduction.xhtml_general-item13}

The significance of the *nikāyas* was recognized by European scholars
early on. I will discuss specifics of the editions and translations in
the essays on the individual *nikāyas*, and here offer some general
remarks.

During the 19th century, European scholars became aware of the Pali
tradition, seeing in it a reliable source of information for the Buddha,
his times and his teachings. An English civil servant in Sri Lanka,
Thomas Rhys Davids, learned Pali from the monks, initially to help him
better understand Sri Lankan legal practices. Recognizing the
significance of these texts, he returned to England and established the
Pali Text Society (PTS), largely funded by Asian donors. They obtained
palm-leaf manuscripts, on the basis of which the PTS prepared print
editions of the main Pali texts.

The PTS editions introduced a number of ideas from European scholarship.
Most obviously, they used a set of conventions for presenting Indic
scripts with European letters. This system is lossless, so texts may be
automatically changed from one script to another. It enables easy
comparison between the editions of the Pali canon from different
countries, which traditionally had been written in diverse local
scripts. They also introduced titles at the start of texts, punctuation
and capitalization, page numbers, footnotes, variant readings, and
various other modern innovations.

One innovation that was not pursued consistently was the use of chapter
and section numbers. These were added to the PTS Pali editions of the
Dīgha Nikāya and the Vinaya, and are used in subsequent translations.
However most of the PTS editions lack such sections, with the
unfortunate consequence that academic referencing of Pali texts is still
based on the volume and page of the PTS edition, a system that is
neither practical nor precise.

The PTS editions were ground-breaking and have exerted an unparalleled
influence on modern Buddhism, both east and west. Asian scholars have
been well aware of them, with the consequence that it is probably hard
to find any printed edition from the 20th century that is completely
free of their influence. Nevertheless, the PTS texts are not
particularly reliable. They were put together over a considerable period
of time, with scant resources and few workers. The editors used whatever
manuscripts they had to hand, and, apart from a general preference for
Sri Lankan readings, it is hard to discern a consistent or clear
methodology in their choices of readings. The limitations of these
editions are well known among experts in the field, and in some cases
updated and improved editions have been published.

For my translation of the *nikāyas*, I preferred to use the Mahāsaṅgīti
edition. This is essentially a digital representation of the Burmese
textual tradition of the 6th Council, itself based on the 19th century
5th Council text. It is based on the digital edition prepared by the
Vipassana Research Institute, with extensive proofreading and
corrections by the Dhamma Society of Bangkok. The Mahāsaṅgīti is a
consistent and carefully edited digital text, and for that reason was
chosen as the root Pali text for SuttaCentral. But it should not be
assumed that it is the most authentic. On the contrary, it preserves the
Burmese readings, which tend to correct the text in conformity with the
Pali grammars. Nevertheless, in almost all such cases there is no
difference in the meaning, just minor differences in spelling.

Like most translators, when editions vary I did not adhere to one
edition, but simply selected what seems to be the best reading in each
case. I referred to the PTS editions fairly often. More rarely, I
consulted the romanized Buddha Jayanthi edition found on GRETIL; note,
however, that the digital edition is widely regarded as being inferior
to the original in Sinhalese script. Occasionally I also consulted the
Rama 5 edition in Thai script. I also consulted previous translations,
especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

In problematic cases I cross-checked the Pali against the Sanskrit and
Chinese parallels; I did not make use of Tibetan sources. However in
every case the overriding intention was to accurately represent the Pali
text. Only in a very few exceptional cases did I rely on the Sanskrit or
Chinese parallels to correct the Pali.

</article>

[]{#introduction.xhtml}

<article class="introduction" id="introduction">

# The Long Discourses: Dhamma as literature and compilation

Bhikkhu Sujato, 2019

<nav class="contents">

1.  [How the Dīgha is Organized](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1)
2.  [The Gradual Training](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2)
3.  [How to Build a Long Discourse](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3)
4.  [The Mahāparinibbāna Cycle](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4)
5.  [A Brief Textual History](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5)

</nav>

The Dīgha Nikāya is the first of the four main divisions in the Sutta
Piṭaka of the Pali Canon (*tipiṭaka*). It is translated here as
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Long Discourses`</cite>`{=html}.
As the title suggests, its discourses are somewhat longer than those of
other *nikāyas*. There are, however, only 34 discourses in the
collection, so despite the length of the individual discourses, the
collection as a whole is the shortest of the *nikāyas*.

It is distinguished from the other *nikāyas* by its more developed and
elaborate literary forms. Outgrowing the bare and direct style of most
of the early texts, here the extra length offers space for narratives
and doctrinal expositions to find a fuller expression. This is an early
hint at how the literary form of Buddhist texts was to develop in later
years, moving towards expansiveness and abundance.

It is no coincidence that these elaborate texts are often addressed to
the brahmins, who were the self-proclaimed spiritual leaders of the
time. The brahmins were the custodians of the most sophisticated texts
in ancient India up to this time, the Vedic literature. It seems that
one aim of the Dīgha was to impress such learned men. These discourses
offer a wide range of examples of how the Buddha related to those of
other religious paths.

Another overriding theme of the Dīgha is the passing away of the Buddha.
The centerpiece of the collection is [DN
16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref},
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great Discourse on the
Buddha's Extinguishment`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
a discourse of unrivaled importance. This presents the last journey of
the Buddha, wandering in unhurried stages from town to town, each step
bringing him closer to his passing. In the very length of the text,
recording so many details of the journey, we can sense a longing to draw
out those last precious days as far as possible.

## How the Dīgha is Organized {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1}

The 34 discourses are grouped in three *vaggas*. The first *vagga*
consists of thirteen discourses, each of which includes a lengthy
passage on the spiritual practice of a monastic, known as the Gradual
Training (*anupubbasikkhā*).

In the second *vagga* we find several discourses of a more biographical
nature. [DN 14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great Discourse on Traces
Left Behind`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpadānasutta`</cite>`{=html}) tells
of past Buddhas, while [DN 16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
tells of Gotama's last days. In addition, some other discourses in this
section are closely related to the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}. I
will discuss this cycle further below.

The final *vagga* is more miscellaneous. It includes long poetic
sections, doctrinal compilations---some of which are precursors to the
Abhidhamma---and narratives that are often humorous and occasionally
border on farce.

As usual in the *nikāyas*, there is no overall sequence of the teaching
and many details of organization appear quite arbitrary. Still, we can
discern a purpose in the arrangement of a few of the major discourses.
These details are unique to the Theravadin tradition, so should be seen
as reflecting their concerns, rather than the fundamental principles of
the Dīgha.

The first discourse, [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Prime Net`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Brahmajālasutta`</cite>`{=html}), sets
out a scheme of wrong views, and thus acts as a filter for the Dhamma,
screening out possible misinterpretations. It seems that this
arrangement was connected with the events of the so-called "Third
Council" under King Ashoka, at a time when the Saṅgha was overrun with
imposters who were not genuine Buddhists. The second discourse, [DN
2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Fruits of the Ascetic
Life`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sāmaññaphalasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
addresses a fundamental question: why do people follow a life of
renunciation? In answering this, it sets forth the Gradual Training, a
distinctively Buddhist path to peace.

The middle of the collection is dominated by discourses that deal in one
way or another with the cosmic significance of the Buddha ([DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}, [DN
16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}, [DN
17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17){.ref}, [DN
18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18){.ref}, [DN
19](https://suttacentral.net/dn19){.ref}, [DN
20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20){.ref}, [DN
21](https://suttacentral.net/dn21){.ref}; to these may be added [DN
26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26){.ref}, [DN
27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27){.ref}, [DN
30](https://suttacentral.net/dn30){.ref}, and [DN
32](https://suttacentral.net/dn32){.ref}). Where the biographical texts
of the Majjhima emphasize the practical and the personal, the specifics
of how *our* Buddha lived, these discourses exist in an arena of mythic
grandeur. Time and space are expanded as the poignant and personal
details of the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
are set among a series of mythological texts that show the potency of
the Buddha and his teachings in the deep past, in the apocalyptic
future, and in the present among the orders of gods.

The central event in all this is the death of the Buddha. Historically
this was a traumatic crisis for the Buddhist community, and many feared
that the Dhamma would not survive. By lifting attention from the present
trauma and pointing to a longer meaning, these suttas show that the
Dhamma need not die with the Buddha. The events of the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
spurred the Saṅgha to hold the First Council, where the discourses were
collected and organized to ensure their preservation. And these are, of
course, the very scriptures that we are reading. In this way, these
narratives tell the story of their own origin.

The Dīgha finishes with mostly doctrinal compilations ([DN
28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28){.ref}, [DN
29](https://suttacentral.net/dn29){.ref}, [DN
33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33){.ref}, [DN
34](https://suttacentral.net/dn34){.ref}). If the beginning of the Dīgha
tells us *why* the teachings matter and the middle tells us *how* they
came to be, the ending tells us *what* they are. It is a rather curious
thing that in the Dīgha, many of the doctrines that we think of as
fundamental to the Buddha's teachings occur only rarely. These
discourses rectify this situation, ensuring that the students of the
Dīgha had access to a wide range of teachings. The last two discourses,
in particular, are compiled as handy mnemonics for memorizing sets of
doctrinal teachings.

## The Gradual Training {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2}

The Gradual Training sets out the steps taken by a Buddhist renunciate
on their path. It begins with the arising of a Buddha in the world.
Hearing the Buddha's teaching, a person reflects on how best it can be
applied to their own life. Realizing that "the household life is cramped
and dirty, but the life of one gone forth is wide open", they give up
their worldly possessions and attachments, don the ochre robe of a
Buddhist mendicant, and undertake a life of morality, simplicity, and
meditation. Proceeding step by step to ever more advanced practices,
they eventually enter into deep meditative absorption (*jhāna*) before
realizing the four noble truths and finding true freedom.

The Gradual Training is an expansion of the threefold training (*tisso
sikkhā*): ethics (*sīla*), meditative immersion (*samādhi*), and wisdom
(*paññā*). At [AN 3.89](https://suttacentral.net/an3.89){.ref} the three
trainings are defined:

- ethics (in a monastic context) requires keeping the monastic rules;
- meditative immersion is the four absorptions;
- wisdom is the understanding of the four noble truths.

This teaching is distributed widely throughout the early Buddhist texts.
In the Dīgha, for example, it's found in the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html} as
a standard teaching repeated by the Buddha at many of the stops on his
journey. A series of shorter discourses on this subject may be found in
the Samaṇa Vagga of the Aṅguttara ([AN
3.81--91](https://suttacentral.net/an3-samanavagga){.ref}).

This brief overview of the path is explained more fully in the Gradual
Training, which explains each of the three trainings in considerable
detail. This longer exposition appears to have been the original
teaching on the overall lifestyle, practices, and aims of the Buddha's
mendicant followers. It seems that the Buddha preferred to encourage his
monastics by exhorting them to follow the highest ideals of conduct and
meditation. Only reluctantly did he set up the legal system of the
Vinaya texts, with its procedures and punishments.

The Gradual Training is found, in somewhat varying forms, in the
Majjhima ([MN 27](https://suttacentral.net/mn27){.ref}, [MN
51](https://suttacentral.net/mn51){.ref}, [MN
38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38){.ref}, [MN
39](https://suttacentral.net/mn39){.ref}, [MN
53](https://suttacentral.net/mn53){.ref}, [MN
107](https://suttacentral.net/mn107){.ref}, [MN
125](https://suttacentral.net/mn125){.ref}), the Aṅguttara ([AN
4.198](https://suttacentral.net/an4.198){.ref}, [AN
10.99](https://suttacentral.net/an10.99){.ref}), and even the Abhidhamma
([Vb 12](https://suttacentral.net/vb12){.ref}, [Pp
2.4:114](https://suttacentral.net/pp2.4#114){.ref}). Curiously enough,
however, it is not found among the collected discourses on the path
found in the last book of the Saṁyutta. While virtually all of the
practices of the Gradual Training are found in the Saṁyutta, the overall
framework is not.

The Dīgha makes up for this lack by placing a *vagga* of thirteen
discourses right at the start featuring the Gradual Training. This is
called the Sīlakkhandhavagga, the "Chapter on the Aggregate of Ethics".
Despite the title, however, these texts treat the full training on
ethics, meditative immersion, and wisdom.

While the content is similar in each place that the Gradual Training
appears, the Dīgha versions feature a pronounced emphasis on beauty and
pleasure. The stages of the path are illustrated by similes that are as
lovely as they are apt, while each step of the path is said to be
accompanied by a deepening sense of pleasure and happiness. The Gradual
Training is not a path of suffering, but one of grace and joy and
freedom.

Due to the repetition, the texts invariably abbreviate all the
expositions except for the first two discourses. It should be
remembered, however, that this is merely a consequence of how the Pali
tradition arranged these texts. In the Sanskrit and Chinese Dīrghāgamas,
the texts in this section are arranged differently, and different suttas
are either expanded or abbreviated accordingly.

While the focus is firmly on monastic life, the general principles hold
good for everyone, and indeed at [MN
53](https://suttacentral.net/mn53){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}A Trainee`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sekhasutta`</cite>`{=html}), Ānanda
teaches essentially the same path to a lay audience. In the
Sīlakkhandhavagga, many discourses are addressed to lay people, most of
whom are brahmins.

The question of King Ajātasattu in [DN
2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2){.ref} provides the key to understanding
why this is so. He points out that in worldly life, each profession can
be seen to have its own benefit. But what is the benefit of the
renunciate life? While other ascetics falter before this question, the
Buddha presents the Gradual Training. He shows how the life gone forth
is not one of pain and distress, nor one of delayed gratification, but
one that shows real benefits in this life. It is about the power and
transformative potential of inner development and meditation. In
contrast, the household path offers only limited happiness, with much
uncertainty and stress, while the paths of other ascetics are unclear,
ineffective, or painful, and the brahmins can only offer rituals and
prayers of dubious efficacy. Thus the Gradual Training explains why
there is a need for the Saṅgha at all.

Just as the Gradual Training is built from the kernel of the threefold
training, the code of monastic ethics is built from the core principles
of basic precepts. It is divided into three sections. The first section
begins with the most fundamental precept for everyone in Buddhism:
non-violence, to refrain from killing any creature, however small. It
continues with items found in such common teachings as the five precepts
and the ten paths of skillful action. But it adds items that especially
pertain to monastic life, such as avoiding luxuries and ownership of
property. The second section on ethics expands these specifically
monastic and renunciate precepts in much greater detail, while the final
section deals with right livelihood. A Buddhist monastic, who relies on
alms food given in faith, should not make a living by other means,
especially through superstitious and magical practices.

The Gradual Training builds on these ethical foundations as the
mendicant undertakes a series of practices designed to quell the
busyness and activity of the mind. They rein in their senses, avoiding
overly stimulating things. They focus on remaining mindful and aware
throughout all their activities. They aim at contentment, being
satisfied with a few simple possessions.

Only when all these have been developed does the mendicant resort to
seclusion for meditation. Going to the forest, they undertake
mindfulness meditation and give up the five hindrances that prevent
peace of mind. These hindrances are one of the core meditation teachings
in the suttas, regarded as the key obstacle to absorption. They are:

Sensual desire
:   Includes any kind of craving, greed, or desire for sensual
    experience. It includes powerful forms such as sexual desire as well
    as more subtle kinds of attachment.

Ill will
:   Anything from outright hatred to subtle forms of annoyance and
    aversion come under this hindrance.

Dullness and drowsiness
:   When the mind begins to settle down in meditation, it commonly
    becomes sleepy or dull.

Restlessness and remorse
:   Restlessness is always looking for some future experience, while
    remorse keeps digging up the past, especially moments of regret.

Doubt
:   It is normal and healthy to doubt when it comes to things that we do
    not know. But if we do not understand the elements of what is right
    and what is wrong, doubt will subtly undermine our meditation.

Experiencing an ever-deepening peace and bliss, they ultimately enter a
series of profoundly still states of meditative immersion known as the
four absorptions (*jhānas*).

The absorptions are the fundamental meditation practice in early
Buddhism and are essential to all stages of Awakening. They occur in
many contexts, but it is here, in the Gradual Training, that they emerge
most naturally from the life and practice undertaken by the mendicants.
This context was so central to early Buddhists that when they compiled
the early Abhidhamma text, the Vibhaṅga, the chapter on Absorption
begins with the Gradual Training. It is true, there are lay followers in
the early texts who were said to have practiced absorption. But it is
equally true that when the Buddha taught how to attain such profound
peace, he emphasized the power of deep renunciation.

It has become common in certain modern forms of Buddhism to assert that
absorptions are not an essential part of the path. Others say that,
while important, the absorptions are relatively shallow states of
concentration that may be easily attained on a short retreat. Suffice to
say, neither of these views finds support in the early texts. The
absorptions are essential, profound, and difficult to attain. Even with
the full strength of renunciation, many mendicants in the Buddha's day
struggled to realize them. Nevertheless, it is a special quality of the
Dhamma that each step along the path is accompanied by deepening peace
and joy, and letting go gets easier the further one travels. This is
what makes the realization of even such profound and subtle states
possible.

Emerging from the absorptions, the mendicant harnesses the power of a
deeply purified mind to realize a series of special forms of knowledge
or insight. These culminate in the realization of the four noble truths:

1.  Suffering (*dukkha*).
2.  The origin of suffering, i.e. craving (*samudaya*).
3.  The cessation of suffering, i.e. Nibbāna (*nirodha*).
4.  The practice that leads to the end of suffering (*magga*).

Suffering is the spur that drives us to undertake spiritual practice.
Only when we have some experience of suffering will we look for an
escape. And when encountering the Buddha's teaching, a seeker recognizes
that the Dhamma speaks to that which matters in their own life, offering
a powerful and pragmatic solution. But wallowing in suffering gets you
nowhere. When you understand that this suffering is real, but has causes
and conditions that you can do something about, it sparks faith and the
resolve to act. The path itself is one of unfolding happiness and
receding pain; the truth of the ending of suffering is experienced at
every step. This culminates in the experience of profound meditative
stillness, called absorption (*jhāna*) or immersion (*samādhi*). In such
states, having let go of sensual desire, the five external senses cease
(*vivicc'eva kāmehi*) and the mind feels a sense of peace and happiness
unlike anything it has known before. Empowered by the clarity and
brilliance of absorption, the reality of suffering and its cause becomes
apparent. This signifies that one has realized the first stage of
awakening, that of the stream-enterer (*sotāpanna*).

Stream-entry occurs when all the factors of the path---from the arousing
of faith to the practice of absorption and deep insight---have been
developed to a sufficient degree. At this point one has a profound
insight into the nature of reality, letting go of three of the ten
fetters that bind a person to rebirth. In the Gradual Training, the
understanding of the four noble truths is usually followed by the
understanding of the end of the defilements (*āsava*), which signifies
the attainment of full perfection (*arahattā*). The remaining fetters
are given up at this point, which is the final stage of the path: full
awakening and freedom.

## How to Build a Long Discourse {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3}

There are over a thousand discourses recorded in each of the Aṅguttara
and the Saṁyutta Nikāyas, but only 34 long texts are recorded in the
Dīgha. The relatively short texts of the Aṅguttara and Saṁyutta are
reminiscent of the pre-Buddhist Upaniṣads, especially the Bṛhadāraṇyaka
and Chandogya. These consist of a series of mostly independent passages,
each episode covering no more than a few pages, and assembled into a
much larger text. They are recollections of concise and focused
teachings at certain times and places by certain people. It would seem,
then, from the overwhelming majority of contemporary texts both Buddhist
and Brahmanical, that the short discourse or dialogue was the standard
format.

How, then, were these long texts constructed? Why? And for whom? Let us
approach these questions by briefly considering a few different forms
employed in the Dīgha.

### Inherently Complex Subjects

Some discourses are long because the subject matter is inherently
complex and demands a lengthy explanation. Of course, the Buddha was a
master of presenting subjects in both pithy and detailed forms.
Nevertheless, there are a few discourses whose subject matter requires
extensive treatment.

The most prominent example of this is the Gradual Training. In some
cases---for example [DN 6](https://suttacentral.net/dn6){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Mahāli`</cite>`{=html} and
[DN 7](https://suttacentral.net/dn7){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Jāliya`</cite>`{=html}---the
discourse consists of little more than this passage, with a simple
narrative background and some short extra teachings. So it seems that
the presence of the long Gradual Training section was itself enough to
qualify a discourse as "long". Since this passage aims to provide a
detailed guide to the whole of the renunciate spiritual life, from
hearing the teaching to full awakening, the length is inherent in the
subject matter. True, it is taught more briefly elsewhere, but even in
those cases it tends to be somewhat long, and there was a tendency to
make it more inclusive.

In other cases the Gradual Training is taught in the middle of a
discourse that is already quite extensive. Such is the case with [DN
1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Brahmajala`</cite>`{=html}, although
here, uniquely, it is only the first section on Ethics that is taught.
But the bulk of the text sets forth a network of 62 kinds of wrong view.
Here, the nature of the subject matter is so extensive and complex that
a shorter exposition would not do it justice. Indeed, when this teaching
is mentioned in shorter discourses ([SN
41.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.3){.ref}), it is not summarized, but
the reader is referred rather to the full text.

### Compilations

Far more common than inherently lengthy teachings are the compilations.
In such cases, a long text provides an occasion or background framework
within which a series of short passages are collected. Such passages
usually occur in identical or near-identical form in the Aṅguttara or
the Saṁyutta, and occasionally the Majjhima. Compiling them here enables
the reciters of the Dīgha to learn a wide range of doctrines, and
provides an essential backup, preserving the texts in case the shorter
discourses are lost.

In a few instances, such short passages are not found elsewhere in the
same form. Whether that is because they were unique to the Dīgha, or
because the parallel passages have become lost, is hard to say.

How do we end up with parallel passages in so many different places?

the Buddha taught very often and, like all teachers, repeated his
message many times. Such repeated teachings would have been collected in
various places. This would be the case with important and generic
teachings found throughout the Buddhist literature, like the four noble
truths or the four absorptions.

In some cases, though, this is unlikely or impossible. For example, we
sometimes find the same event on the same occasion---with the same
teaching, the same location, and the same people---occurring in more
than one text. In such instances, it is clear that there is, in fact,
just one passage, and it has been copied into two or more places.

Generally speaking, it is prudent to assume that such passages existed
as short discourses before being collected into larger forms. This is
because, as noted above, the short discourse is the dominant form, and
rests closest to the oral tradition. It is a principle observed
everywhere through early Buddhist texts that the redactors preferred to
add rather than subtract. Thus texts commonly become longer over time,
and rarely shorter.

Examples of compilation are very common, and almost every discourse in
the Dīgha does this to some extent. Here are just a few examples.

[DN 16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
includes a wide range of collected passages. In some cases, events
pertinent to the narrative may have occurred there originally and been
extracted later, while in other cases the included passages seem
strangely extraneous to the context and were no doubt added in at some
point.

Venerable Sāriputta is said to be the main author of several such long
compilations. He is the teacher in [DN
33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Reciting in
Concert`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saṅgītisutta`</cite>`{=html}) and [DN
34](https://suttacentral.net/dn34){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Up to Ten`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Dasuttarasutta`</cite>`{=html}), which
consist almost entirely of short passages collected from elsewhere in
the suttas and arranged by number. In [DN
28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Inspiring
Confidence`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sampasādanīyasutta`</cite>`{=html}) he
expresses his great faith in the Buddha and cites a long series of
passages to display the Buddha's glory.

A more sophisticated form of compilation is found in [DN
22](https://suttacentral.net/dn22){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse on
Mindfulness Meditation`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
the most important meditation discourse in 20th century Theravāda. It
gives a detailed account of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
These are taught in brief in many places, but the details are found only
here and at the mostly identical [MN
10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Mindfulness
Meditation`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Satipaṭṭhānasutta`</cite>`{=html}).
Whereas many compilations simply list a series of different teachings,
here the text is very systematic, organizing the compiled passages under
the four heads. These meditation passages are mostly not found elsewhere
in the Dīgha, and were no doubt added to ensure the Dīgha reciters
preserved the full range of meditation teachings.

To the already lengthy discourse at [MN
10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref} is added a full exposition on
the four noble truths, sourced from [MN
141](https://suttacentral.net/mn141){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Analysis of the
Truths`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saccavibhaṅgasutta`</cite>`{=html}).
In Burmese editions, this extended section later made its way back into
the text of [MN 10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}. Since
SuttaCentral's text is a Burmese one, we include this in our Pali, but
mark it as an addition.

### Narratives: backgrounds, parables, and myths

Unusually for early Buddhist texts, the Dīgha includes several lengthy
narratives. Most obviously this includes [DN
16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}.
But it also includes several other narratives.

In common with the discourses of other collections, we often find a
simple narrative background that gives context to the teaching. However,
in some cases, this is developed in much greater detail as the
narratives come to play a more sophisticated literary role than a mere
setting.

[DN 2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sāmaññaphala`</cite>`{=html} opens with
King Ajātasattu of Magadha exclaiming over the beauty of the moonlit
night and asking his ministers for advice as to which ascetic teacher he
should visit. From the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
and discourses elsewhere we know that Ajātasattu was a warlike king, so
this setting immediately establishes a sense of wonder. The narrative
unfolds gracefully, avoiding the excess of ornament so typical of later
Indian narratives, and holding the key to its mystery close to its
chest. Only at the end of the text do we learn the dreadful secret that
plagues the king's heart. Thus the narrative portions imbue the
teachings---on the doctrines of other teachers as contrasted with the
Buddha's Gradual Training---with a tragic pathos.

In addition to backgrounds, we also find narratives that are told as
stories in the discourses themselves. These include short parables like
the tale of the monk who mistakenly sought among the gods for an answer
to his question ([DN 11](https://suttacentral.net/dn11){.ref}). In [DN
23](https://suttacentral.net/dn23){.ref} the monk Kumāra Kassapa debates
with the skeptic Pāyāsi, illustrating his arguments with a series of
tales alternatively humorous and gruesome. Such parables are found not
infrequently elsewhere in the suttas, but in the Dīgha certain stories
expand beyond this and approach the stature of myth. This includes some
of the texts in the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
cycle, such as [DN 17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāsudassanasutta`</cite>`{=html} and
[DN 14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpadānasutta`</cite>`{=html}.

To forestall a common misunderstanding, in the study of religion, "myth"
does not mean "something believed to be true that is actually false", as
it does in popular culture. Rather, a myth is a sacred story. Some
sacred stories are true, some are inventions. But this is a matter for
historians and is irrelevant to the mythology itself. The purpose of
myth is to tell a story that creates meaning for those who participate
in it, so they can understand their own lives in the context of the
story being expressed.

The Dīgha contains truly mythic texts in [DN
26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Wheel-Turning
Monarch`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cakkavattisīhanādasutta`</cite>`{=html})
and [DN 27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Origin of the
World`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Aggaññasutta`</cite>`{=html}). These
set forth a myth of origins, replacing conventional creation mythology
with an evolutionary account of how the world came to be the way it is.
In these stories, human choices play a critical role in how the
environment evolves, and in how it will all fall apart. The
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Aggañña`</cite>`{=html} depicts
anthropogenic climate change quite explicitly, showing how human
activity affects the plants, the weather, and the natural ecosystem of
which we are a part (see also [AN
3.56](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56){.ref}).

The mythology is essentially cyclic. There is no absolute beginning,
just another turning of the wheel. Thus even when the world falls apart
and civilization collapses, there will be a new renaissance, far in the
future, and ultimately another Buddha will arise. He is named Metteyya
(Sanskrit: *Maitreya*), who in the early texts appears only in [DN
26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cakkavattisīhanāda`</cite>`{=html}. He
went on to become one of the most important figures in Mahāyāna
Buddhism, and many Buddhists even today still await his coming with
hope. Yet [DN 26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26){.ref} is not taught in
order to encourage devotees to dedicate themselves to Metteyya, but to
illustrate the impermanence and uncertainty of our lives. The Buddha
always taught that we should practice as best we can to understand the
Dhamma in this life.

## The Mahāparinibbāna Cycle {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4}

In several instances, episodes mentioned in brief in the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
have been spun off and expanded to become individual discourses in their
own right. Thus the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
dominates much of the Dīgha, not just through its length and thematic
weight, but through its influence and connections with other discourses.

In my view, this cycle of suttas was likely composed by Ānanda and his
students, beginning this great literary work with the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
itself, and gradually branching off into related works. The cycle as a
whole shows not only Ānanda's characteristic personal love and devotion
for the Buddha, but also reveals a concern for what is to come, for the
fate of the Dhamma in the years after the Buddha's passing. One
distinctive unifying detail of these discourses is that they do not end
with the standard phrase saying that the listeners rejoiced in the
teachings, but instead finish directly with a teaching or a verse on the
subject of impermanence or the long-lasting of the dispensation. Ānanda
survived the Buddha for several decades, and his legacy was the
establishment of the texts, thus preserving the memory of his beloved
Teacher for future generations.

[DN 16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great Discourse on the Buddha's Extinguishment`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   Beginning with King Ajātasattu of Magadha declaring his intent to
    invade the Vajjis, and ending with the peaceful distribution of the
    Buddha's relics to the potentially warring nations and clans, the
    story of the Buddha's last journeys is as politically revealing as
    it is spiritually moving. Throughout, the theme of impermanence
    unifies the diverse events and teachings. The weight of constructing
    such an epic shows, however, in the considerable differences between
    extant versions of the text. Many of the extra repetitious
    sections---such as the superfluous sets of eight that follow the
    eight causes of earthquakes---are not found in all parallels. It
    seems that over time, more and more material was added, and at
    certain points, portions of the text were split off to form other
    discourses in the cycle.

[DN 17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}King Mahāsudassana`</cite>`{=html}
:   In a small scene of the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html},
    Ānanda encourages the Buddha to pass away in a well-known city, not
    in the obscure village of Kusinārā. The Buddha rebukes him, saying
    that in the past it had been a great city. The Sanskrit
    (Sarvāstivāda) versions of the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
    include a shorter account of the story of King Mahāsudassana in
    their
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
    itself, but in the Pali, it has become greatly extended and formed
    into its own long discourse. The discourse itself is fabulous, full
    of extended passages on the crystal balustrades and other wonders of
    Mahāsudassana's palace. But at its heart is a very human story: the
    love of the queen for her king, and the pain of letting go. The
    struggle that the queen undergoes to fully understand that her king
    must pass mirrors the struggles of Ānanda in the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
    as he comes to terms with the passing of his beloved Teacher.

[DN 18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Janavasabha`</cite>`{=html}
:   Like [DN 17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17){.ref}, this begins with
    a short passage extracted from the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html},
    to which has been added an extended narrative. During the journey in
    the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html},
    Ānanda asks the Buddha to reveal the fate after the death of
    devotees in the town of Ñātika. This otherwise obscure town was the
    main city of the Ñātika clan, to which the Jain leader Mahāvīra
    belonged, and it appears to come to prominence to show that even his
    own people became Buddhists. Characteristically, it ends with the
    Buddha showing how people may know for themselves their own
    spiritual progress. This short passage is preserved as an
    independent discourse also in [SN
    55.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.10){.ref}. In [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18){.ref}, however, the discourse
    continues with a long story of the doings of the gods, as told by
    the spirit Janavasabha. It culminates by saying that this discourse
    was learned by the Buddha from Janavasabha, and from there was
    taught to Ānanda, and he informed the assemblies of monks, nuns,
    laymen, and laywomen, resulting in the Buddha's dispensation being
    famous and successful among gods and men. This corroborates the idea
    that these discourses, shaped by Ānanda, were aimed at ensuring the
    long-lasting of Buddhism.

[DN 28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Inspiring Confidence`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sampasādanīyasuttasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   The
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
    records an incident where Sāriputta, the Buddha's foremost disciple,
    comes to him and makes a "lion's roar" of his faith in the Buddha,
    based on his understanding of Dhamma. This is recorded as an
    independent discourse at [SN
    47.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.12){.ref}. We also have a short
    discourse at [SN 47.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.13){.ref} that
    tells of Sāriputta's death. This echoes the themes of the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html},
    even including the famous saying that one should be one's own
    refuge. This must have happened during the journey recorded in the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}.
    Oddly, however, it is not included in [DN
    16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}, and in addition, it
    situates the Buddha in Sāvatthī, far from the track of his journey.
    Regardless, in [DN 28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28){.ref} the
    passage on the lion's roar was expanded into its extensive
    discourse, with Sāriputta expounding at length on various inspiring
    qualities of the Buddha. This gives an opportunity to list many
    standard doctrinal teachings. Like [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18){.ref}, the sutta ends with an
    exhortation to share the teaching.

In addition to texts that have a direct literary and narrative
connection with the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html},
there is a further series of discourses that share a more indirect or
thematic connection.

[DN 14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great Discourse on Traces Left Behind`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpadānasuttasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   The Buddha gives biographical details of six past Buddhas, as well
    as a lengthy account of the life of one of them, Vipassī. This
    discourse establishes the historical Buddha Gotama as one of a
    series of world teachers that stretches back into the deep past, and
    whose dispensations all follow similar patterns.

[DN 29](https://suttacentral.net/dn29){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}An Impressive Discourse`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Pāsādikasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   This begins with the story of the passing away of the Jain leader
    Mahāvīra. The Pali texts call him *nigaṇṭha nātaputta*, which is
    often misunderstood as a proper name. *Nigaṇṭha*, rather, means
    "knotless" and is a term for a Jain ascetic, while *nāta* is a
    misspelling of his clan, the Ñātikas. *Nigaṇṭha nātaputta* therefore
    means "the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan", just as *samaṇa gotama*
    means "the ascetic of the Gotama clan", or *acela kassapa* means
    "the naked ascetic of the Kassapa clan". In the Buddhist texts, his
    death is depicted as a disaster for the Jains, as they fell apart in
    conflict right away. Whether this is historically accurate or not,
    the text shows the Buddha taking the opportunity to teach the
    qualities that make a religious movement last long after the passing
    of the founder. Discourses in response to this are found at [DN
    16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}, [DN
    29](https://suttacentral.net/dn29){.ref}, [DN
    33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33){.ref}, and [MN
    104](https://suttacentral.net/mn104){.ref}. In the current sutta,
    contrasting his dispensation with what he claims was the inadequacy
    of Jain teachings, the Buddha declares that the faith and practice
    of his followers are well-grounded since they are based on genuine
    Awakening.

[DN 30](https://suttacentral.net/dn30){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Marks of a Great Man`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Lakkhaṇasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   The early texts refer several times to a mysterious set of bodily
    characteristics known as the "marks of a great man". These are said
    to fulfill a Brahmanical prophecy that one who possesses such marks
    will either become a universal emperor or a fully awakened Buddha.
    This prophecy and the list of thirty-two marks have not been exactly
    identified in extant Brahmanical texts, but recent research has
    uncovered a complex system of similar marks in old Brahmanical
    texts, many of which invite comparison with the Buddhist list. The
    story of the two paths is a classic mythological theme, found in the
    oldest known myth, the story of Gilgamesh. The marks of a great man
    exist as a curious counterpoint to the rational teachings found in
    most of the suttas. In this particular sutta, the Buddha is said to
    have explained each mark as a consequence of a specific kind of
    kammic deed. The literary and verse styles betray this as a late
    composition, and it has no real parallel in other collections.
    Nevertheless, it remains as a testament to the evolution of the idea
    of the Buddha, relating his spiritual qualities to his physical
    presence.

[DN 33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Reciting in Concert`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saṅgītisutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   Like [DN 29](https://suttacentral.net/dn29){.ref}, this discourse is
    set after the death of Mahāvīra. Speaking to the Mallians of
    Pāvā---who appear also in the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}---the
    Buddha asks Sāriputta to speak on his behalf. This echoes the theme
    of [DN 28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28){.ref} and [DN
    29](https://suttacentral.net/dn29){.ref}, that it is the disciples
    who will be responsible for the continuation of the teachings.
    Sāriputta gives an extensive systematic presentation of doctrines,
    using the Aṅguttara principle of organizing teachings by number.
    Indeed, a study of this discourse can serve as an introduction to
    the teachings found in the Aṅguttara Nikāya. The monastics are
    encouraged to recite these teachings in concert so that they may be
    preserved and the dispensation continued for a long time. This
    discourse anticipates the systematic tendencies of the Abhidhamma,
    and indeed one of the Sarvāstivādin Abhidhamma texts
    (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saṅgītiparyāya`</cite>`{=html})
    consists of an expansion and commentary on this discourse.

[DN 34](https://suttacentral.net/dn34){.ref} `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Up to Ten`</cite>`{=html} (`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Dasuttarasutta`</cite>`{=html})
:   This is similar to the
    `<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saṅgīti`</cite>`{=html}, but with a
    briefer narrative context and an even more systematic style. Here
    the Buddha no longer appears, and the discourse is simply spoken by
    Sāriputta.

This does not exhaust the scope of the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
cycle, for it is not confined to the Dīgha. We have already mentioned
that several shorter suttas contain episodes either found in the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html} or
related to it. And the story does not end with the Buddha's death. The
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html}
tells of the funeral arrangements and events following the Buddha's
passing. In several versions apart from the Pali, this story continues
directly into the account of the First Council. This narrative is the
21st chapter of the Vinaya Khandhakas, and indeed the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html} is
found in the Vinaya of several schools. It is, in fact, one continuous
narrative, and one of the many purposes of the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbānasutta`</cite>`{=html} is
to authorize the actions of the Saṅgha at the First Council,
establishing the fundamental Buddhist scriptures in an organized and
definitive manner. The First Council narrative was then extended to the
Second Council, which echoes many of the same themes and ideas.

These stories of the end of the Buddha's life and teaching are also
echoed in the first chapter of the Vinaya Khandhakas, which tells the
story of the Buddha's awakening, first teaching, and establishing of his
community of followers. These are not just separate episodes in the
Buddha's life. The texts as we have them frequently echo ideas, turns of
phrase, events, and people, all of which show that they were edited and
composed as a coherent whole. Taken together, they make up a framework
of a magnificent mythology: the life and death of the greatest spiritual
teacher that the world has ever known.

## A Brief Textual History {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5}

The Dīgha Nikāya was edited by T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter based
on manuscripts in Sinhalese, Burmese, and Thai scripts, and published in
three volumes in Latin script by the Pali Text Society from 1890 to
1910.

The first translation followed in 1899--1921 by T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys
Davids, and was published under the "Sacred Books of the Buddhists"
series under the title `<cite class="book">`{=html}Dialogues of the
Buddha`</cite>`{=html}. This was a milestone in the publication of
Buddhist texts, and marked the first occasion a full *nikāya* was
available in English. The translation endeavored to retain something of
the literary flavor of the texts and is accompanied by introductory
essays and notes that are often useful and sometimes brilliant. But it
is far from perfect and contains many errors in both reading and
interpretation. Today the insights of Rhys Davids remain valuable
especially in the area of history and society.

An updated translation by Maurice Walshe was published by Wisdom
Publications in 1987 under the title `<cite class="book">`{=html}Thus
Have I Heard: The Long Discourses of the Buddha`</cite>`{=html}, a title
that in later editions was changed to `<cite class="book">`{=html}The
Long Discourses of the Buddha`</cite>`{=html}. The Walshe edition
benefited from many decades of study and practice of Dhamma in the west.
Avoiding the archaic stylings of the older translations, it remains a
clear and approachable translation, with a far more accurate handling of
doctrinal terms and passages. But it is far from perfect. It leans
heavily on the Rhys Davids translation, and while it corrects many
errors, it sometimes repeats errors found in the older translation.
Worse, it not infrequently introduces new errors.

In addition, there have been many translations of individual discourses
and passages. Of these, the following were especially useful for my
work:

- For [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1){.ref}, [DN
  2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2){.ref}, and [DN
  15](https://suttacentral.net/dn15){.ref}, the translations of text and
  commentary by Bhikkhu Bodhi.
- For [DN 16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}, the translation by
  Bhikkhu Ānandajoti.
- For the verses of [DN 30](https://suttacentral.net/dn30){.ref}, the
  translations and studies by K.R. Norman.
- For [DN 31](https://suttacentral.net/dn31){.ref}, the translation by
  John Kelly, Sue Sawyer, and Victoria Yareham.

</article>

[]{#acknowledgements.xhtml}

<article id="acknowledgements">

# Acknowledgements

I remember with gratitude all those from whom I have learned the Dhamma,
especially Ajahn Brahm and Bhikkhu Bodhi, the two monks who more than
anyone else showed me the depth, meaning, and practical value of the
Suttas.

Special thanks to Dustin and Keiko Cheah and family, who sponsored my
stay in Qi Mei while I made this translation.

Thanks also for Blake Walshe, who provided essential software support
for my translation work.

Throughout the process of translation, I have frequently sought feedback
and suggestions from the SuttaCentral community on our forum, "Discuss
and Discover". I want to thank all those who have made suggestions and
contributed to my understanding, as well as to the moderators who have
made the forum possible. These translations were significantly improved
due to the careful work of my proofreaders: Ayyā Pāsādā, John and Lynn
Kelly, and Derek Sola. Special thanks are due to Sabbamittā, a true
friend of all, who has tirelessly and precisely checked my work.

Finally my everlasting thanks to all those people, far too many to
mention, who have supported SuttaCentral, and those who have supported
my life as a monastic. None of this would be possible without you.

</article>

[]{#blurbs.xhtml}

<article class="blurbs" id="blurbs">

# Summary of Contents

[[ [Long Discourses Collection ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dīghanikāya]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn){.blurb-link}
:   [A fabulous courtesan, a guilty king, a know-it-all teen, learned
    sages and earnest fools, a silent meditation in a thunderstorm. The
    Long Discourses reveal a Buddha in vital engagement with his times,
    an ideal of humanity in whom the extraordinary comes alive. These
    thirty-four discourses are set in an age of wonder, when prophecy
    was fulfilled and the deep truth of humanity was spoken, laid bare
    with sparkling clarity and relentless insight. In these tales set in
    the slow paths, chaotic cities, and deep forests of northern India,
    in the shadowy past or even among the gods themselves, we see the
    humble monk Gotama, wise and compassionate teacher of mindfulness
    and morality, begin his long and storied transformation into the
    Buddha of legend. ]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on the Entire Spectrum of Ethics ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sīlakkhandhavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn-silakkhandhavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [The Chapter Containing the Section on Ethics (Sīlakkhandhavagga) is
    a chapter of 13 discourses. Each of these contains a long passage on
    the Gradual Training in ethics, meditation, and wisdom. The chapter
    is named after the first of these sections. The two other known
    versions of the Dīrghāgama (in Chinese and Sanskrit) also contain a
    similar chapter. Despite the monastic nature of the central
    teaching, most of these discourses are presented in dialog with lay
    people, with a strong emphasis on the relation between the Buddha's
    teachings and other contemporary movements.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 1]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Prime Net ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Brahmajālasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn1){.blurb-link}
:   [While others may praise or criticize the Buddha, they tend to focus
    on trivial details. The Buddha presents an analysis of 62 kinds of
    wrong view, seeing through which one becomes detached from
    meaningless speculations.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 2]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Fruits of the Ascetic Life ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sāmaññaphalasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn2){.blurb-link}
:   [The newly crowned King Ajātasattu is disturbed by the violent means
    by which he achieved the crown. He visits the Buddha to find peace
    of mind, and asks him about the benefits of spiritual practice. This
    is one of the greatest literary and spiritual texts of early
    Buddhism.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 3]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Ambaṭṭha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ambaṭṭhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn3){.blurb-link}
:   [A young brahmin student attacks the Buddha's family, but is put in
    his place.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 4]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Soṇadaṇḍa ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Soṇadaṇḍasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn4){.blurb-link}
:   [A reputed brahmin visits the Buddha, despite the reservations of
    other brahmins. They discuss the true meaning of a brahmin, and the
    Buddha skillfully draws him around to his own point of
    view.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 5]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Kūṭadanta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kūṭadantasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn5){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmin wishes to undertake a great sacrifice, and asks for the
    Buddha's advice. The Buddha tells a legend of the past, in which a
    king is persuaded to give up violent sacrifice, and instead to
    devote his resources to supporting the needy citizens of his realm.
    However, even such a beneficial and non-violent sacrifice pales in
    comparison to the spiritual sacrifice of giving up
    attachments.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 6]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Mahāli ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahālisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn6){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains to a diverse group of lay people how the
    results of meditation depend on the manner of
    development.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 7]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Jāliya ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Jāliyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn7){.blurb-link}
:   [This discourse is mostly quoted by the Buddha in the
    previous.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 8]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Lion's Roar ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsīhanādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn8){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha is challenged by a naked ascetic on the topic of
    spiritual austerities. He points out that it is quite possible to
    perform all kinds of austere practices without having any inner
    purity of mind.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 9]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Poṭṭhapāda ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Poṭṭhapādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn9){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha discusses with a wanderer the nature of perception and
    how it evolves through deeper states of meditation. None of these,
    however, should be identified with a self or soul.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 10]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Subha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Subhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn10){.blurb-link}
:   [Shortly after the Buddha's death, Venerable Ānanda is invited to
    explain the core teachings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 11]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Kevaddha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kevaṭṭasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn11){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha refuses to perform miracles, explaining that this is not
    the right way to inspire faith. He goes on to tell the story of a
    monk whose misguided quest for answers led him as far as
    Brahmā.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 12]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Lohicca ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Lohiccasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn12){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmin has fallen into the idea that there is no point in trying
    to offer spiritual help to others. The Buddha goes to see him, and
    persuades him of the genuine benefits of spiritual
    teaching.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 13]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Three Knowledges ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Tevijjasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn13){.blurb-link}
:   [A number of brahmins are discussing the true path to Brahmā.
    Contesting the claims to authority based on the Vedas, the Buddha
    insists that only personal experience can lead to the
    truth.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Great Chapter ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāvagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn-mahavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [This chapter contains a diverse range of discourses. Several focus
    on the events surrounding the Buddha's death, while others range
    into fabulous scenarios set among the gods, and still others are
    grounded in detailed discussions of doctrine.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 14]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Traces Left Behind ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāpadānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn14){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha teaches about the six Buddhas of the past, and tells a
    lengthy account of one of those, Vipassī.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 15]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Causation ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahānidānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn15){.blurb-link}
:   [Rejecting Venerable Ānanda's claim to easily understand dependent
    origination, the Buddha presents a complex and demanding analysis,
    revealing hidden nuances and implications of this central
    teaching.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 16]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Discourse on the Buddha's Extinguishment ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn16){.blurb-link}
:   [The longest of all discourses, this extended narrative tells of the
    events surrounding the Buddha's death. Full of vivid and moving
    details, it is an ideal entry point into knowing the Buddha as a
    person, and understanding how the Buddhist community coped with his
    passing.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 17]{.blurb-item .acronym} [King Mahāsudassana ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsudassanasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn17){.blurb-link}
:   [An elaborate story of a past life of the Buddha as a legendary king
    who renounced all to practice meditation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 18]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Janavasabha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Janavasabhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn18){.blurb-link}
:   [Beginning with an account of the fates of disciples who had
    recently passed away, the scene shifts to a discussion of Dhamma
    held by the gods.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 19]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Steward ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāgovindasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn19){.blurb-link}
:   [A minor deity informs the Buddha of the conversations and business
    of the gods.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 20]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Congregation ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsamayasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn20){.blurb-link}
:   [When deities from all realms gather in homage to the Buddha, he
    gives a series of verses describing them. These verses, which are
    commonly chanted in Theravadin countries, give one of the most
    detailed descriptions of the deities worshiped at the the time of
    the Buddha.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 21]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Sakka's Questions ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sakkapañhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn21){.blurb-link}
:   [After hearing a love song from a god of music, the Buddha engages
    in a deep discussion with Sakka on the conditioned origin of
    attachment and suffering.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 22]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn22){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha details the seventh factor of the noble eightfold path,
    mindfulness meditation. This discourse is essentially identical to
    MN 10, with the addition of an extended section on the four noble
    truths derived from MN 141.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 23]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Pāyāsi ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pāyāsisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn23){.blurb-link}
:   [This is a long and entertaining debate between a monk and a
    skeptic, who went to elaborate and bizarre lengths to prove that
    there is no such thing as an afterlife. The discourse contains a
    colorful series of parables and examples.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter with Pāṭikaputta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pāthikavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn-pathikavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Like the previous chapter, this contains a diverse range of
    discourses. It is named after the first discourse in the chapter.
    Among the discourses here are legendary accounts of the history and
    future of our world, which are extremely famous and influential in
    Buddhist circles.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 24]{.blurb-item .acronym} [About Pāṭikaputta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pāthikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn24){.blurb-link}
:   [When Sunakkhatta threatens to disrobe, the Buddha is unimpressed.
    Rejecting showy displays of asceticism or wondrous powers, he
    demonstrates his pre-eminence.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 25]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Lion's Roar at Udumbarikā's Monastery ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Udumbarikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn25){.blurb-link}
:   [This discourse gives a specially good example of dialog between
    religions. The Buddha insists that he is not interested to make
    anyone give up their teacher or practices, but only to help people
    let go of suffering.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 26]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Wheel-Turning Monarch ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cakkavattisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn26){.blurb-link}
:   [In illustration of his dictum that one should rely on oneself, the
    Buddha gives a detailed account of the fall of a kingly lineage of
    the past, and the subsequent degeneration of society. This process,
    however, is not over, as the Buddha predicts that eventually society
    will fall into utter chaos. But far in the future, another Buddha,
    Metteyya, will arise in a time of peace and plenty.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 27]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Origin of the World ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Aggaññasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn27){.blurb-link}
:   [In contrast with the brahmin's self-serving mythologies of the
    past, the Buddha presents an account of evolution that shows how
    human choices are an integral part of the ecological balance, and
    how excessive greed destroys the order of nature.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 28]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Inspiring Confidence ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sampasādanīyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn28){.blurb-link}
:   [Shortly before he passes away, Venerable Sāriputta visits the
    Buddha and utters a moving eulogy of his great
    teacher.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 29]{.blurb-item .acronym} [An Impressive Discourse ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pāsādikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn29){.blurb-link}
:   [Following the death of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the leader of the Jains,
    the Buddha emphasizes the stability and maturity of his own
    community. He encourages the community to come together after his
    death and recite the teachings in harmony.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 30]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Marks of a Great Man ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Lakkhaṇasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn30){.blurb-link}
:   [This presents the brahmanical prophecy of the Great Man, and
    explains the 32 marks in detail. This discourse contains some of the
    latest and most complex verse forms in the canon.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 31]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice to Sigālaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Siṅgālasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn31){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha encounters a young man who honors his dead parents by
    performing rituals. The Buddha recasts the meaningless rites in
    terms of virtuous conduct. This is the most detailed discourse on
    ethics for lay people.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 32]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Āṭānāṭiya Protection ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Āṭānāṭiyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn32){.blurb-link}
:   [Mighty spirits hold a congregation, and warn the Buddha that, since
    not all spirits are friendly, the mendicants should learn verses of
    protection.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 33]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Reciting in Concert ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saṅgītisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn33){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha encourages Venerable Sāriputta to teach the mendicants,
    and he offers an extended listing of Buddhist doctrines arranged in
    numerical sequence.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [DN 34]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Up to Ten ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dasuttarasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn34){.blurb-link}
:   [This is similar to the previous, but with a different manner of
    exposition. These two discourses anticipate some of the methods of
    the Abhidhamma.]{.blurb-content}

</article>

[]{#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml}

# The Chapter on the Entire Spectrum of Ethics {#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_dn-silakkhandhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="dn1">

## [DN 1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Divine Net ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brahmajālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. Talk on Wanderers {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[1](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-1
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
traveling along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā together with a
large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants.[2](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-2
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The wanderer Suppiya was also traveling
along the same road, together with his resident pupil, the student
Brahmadatta.[3](#endnotes.xhtml_note-3){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-3
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Meanwhile, Suppiya criticized the Buddha,
the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many
ways,[4](#endnotes.xhtml_note-4){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-4
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in
many
ways.[5](#endnotes.xhtml_note-5){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-5
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so both tutor and pupil followed behind
the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each
other.

Then the Buddha took up residence for the night in the royal rest-house
in Ambalaṭṭhikā together with the Saṅgha of
mendicants.[6](#endnotes.xhtml_note-6){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-6
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And Suppiya and Brahmadatta did likewise.
There too, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha
in many ways, but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. And
so both tutor and pupil kept on directly contradicting each other.

Then several mendicants rose at the crack of dawn and sat together in
the pavilion, where the topic of judgmentalism came
up:[7](#endnotes.xhtml_note-7){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-7
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing how the diverse convictions of
sentient beings have been clearly comprehended by the Blessed One, who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha.[8](#endnotes.xhtml_note-8){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-8
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this Suppiya criticizes the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, while his pupil Brahmadatta
praises them in many ways. And so both tutor and pupil followed behind
the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each
other."

When the Buddha found out about this discussion on judgmentalism among
the mendicants, he went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread
out and addressed the
mendicants,[9](#endnotes.xhtml_note-9){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-9
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking
about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"[10](#endnotes.xhtml_note-10){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-10
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The mendicants told him what had happened,
adding,[11](#endnotes.xhtml_note-11){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-11
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "This was our conversation that was
unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"Mendicants, if others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don't
make yourselves resentful, bitter, and
exasperated.[12](#endnotes.xhtml_note-12){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-12
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You'll get angry and upset, which would be
an obstacle for you
alone.[13](#endnotes.xhtml_note-13){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-13
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If others were to criticize me, the
teaching, or the Saṅgha, and you got angry and upset, would you be able
to understand whether they spoke well or
poorly?"[14](#endnotes.xhtml_note-14){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-14
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"If others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should explain
that what is untrue is in fact untrue: 'This is why that's untrue, this
is why that's false. There's no such thing in us, it's not found among
us.'

If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don't make yourselves
thrilled, elated, and excited. You'll get thrilled, elated, and excited,
which would be an obstacle for you alone. If others praise me, the
teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should acknowledge that what is true is in
fact true: 'This is why that's true, this is why that's correct. There
is such a thing in us, it is found among us.'

### 2. Ethics {.subheading}

#### 2.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics {.subheading}

When an ordinary person speaks praise of the Realized One, they speak
only of trivial, insignificant details of mere
ethics.[15](#endnotes.xhtml_note-15){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-15
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the trivial, insignificant
details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks
of?[16](#endnotes.xhtml_note-16){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-16
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'The ascetic Gotama has given up killing living creatures. He has
renounced the rod and the sword. He's scrupulous and kind, living full
of sympathy for all living
beings.'[17](#endnotes.xhtml_note-17){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-17
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized
One.[18](#endnotes.xhtml_note-18){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-18
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'The ascetic Gotama has given up stealing. He takes only what's given,
and expects only what's given. He keeps himself clean by not thieving.'
Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up unchastity. He is celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of
sex.'[19](#endnotes.xhtml_note-19){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-19
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up lying. He speaks the truth and sticks
to the truth. He's honest and dependable, and doesn't trick the world
with his
words.'[20](#endnotes.xhtml_note-20){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-20
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up divisive speech. He doesn't repeat in
one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each
other. Instead, he reconciles those who are divided, supporting unity,
delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony.'[21](#endnotes.xhtml_note-21){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-21
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up harsh speech. He speaks in a way that's
mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable
and agreeable to the people.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up talking nonsense. His words are timely,
true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He says
things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial.'[22](#endnotes.xhtml_note-22){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-22
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama refrains from injuring plants and
seeds.'[23](#endnotes.xhtml_note-23){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-23
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and
food at the wrong
time.'[24](#endnotes.xhtml_note-24){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-24
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He refrains from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music
.'[25](#endnotes.xhtml_note-25){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-25
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He refrains from beautifying and adorning himself with garlands,
fragrance, and
makeup.'[26](#endnotes.xhtml_note-26){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-26
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He refrains from high and luxurious
beds.'[27](#endnotes.xhtml_note-27){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-27
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He refrains from receiving gold and
currency,[28](#endnotes.xhtml_note-28){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-28
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} raw
grains,[29](#endnotes.xhtml_note-29){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-29
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} raw meat, women and girls, male and female
bondservants,[30](#endnotes.xhtml_note-30){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-30
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} goats and
sheep,[31](#endnotes.xhtml_note-31){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-31
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses,
and mares, and fields and
land.'[32](#endnotes.xhtml_note-32){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-32
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'He refrains from running errands and
messages;[33](#endnotes.xhtml_note-33){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-33
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} buying and
selling;[34](#endnotes.xhtml_note-34){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-34
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} falsifying weights, metals, or measures;
bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction,
banditry, plunder, and violence.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of
the Realized One.

The shorter section on ethics is finished.

#### 2.2. The Middle Section on Ethics {.subheading}

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in injuring plants and
seeds.[35](#endnotes.xhtml_note-35){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-35
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These include plants propagated from roots,
stems, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the
fifth.[36](#endnotes.xhtml_note-36){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-36
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
injury to plants and seeds.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own
use.[37](#endnotes.xhtml_note-37){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-37
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This includes such things as food, drink,
clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and things of the flesh. The
ascetic Gotama refrains from storing up such goods.' Such is an ordinary
person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in seeing shows. This includes such things as
dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping,
gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and
bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants,
horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails;
staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed
forces, battle-formations, and regimental
reviews.[38](#endnotes.xhtml_note-38){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-38
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
shows.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in gambling that causes
negligence.[39](#endnotes.xhtml_note-39){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-39
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This includes such things as checkers with
eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins,
board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows,
somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing
words from syllables, guessing another's thoughts, and imitating musical
instruments.[40](#endnotes.xhtml_note-40){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-40
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
gambling.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. This includes such
things as sofas, couches, woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white,
embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double- or
single-fringed---and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken
sheets, woven carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope
hide rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
cushions at both ends. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.'
Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. This includes such things as applying
beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors,
ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation,
bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers,
parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed
white robes. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and
adornment.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics
as[41](#endnotes.xhtml_note-41){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-41
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.[42](#endnotes.xhtml_note-42){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-42
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
talk.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in arguments. They say such things as: "You don't
understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and
training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You're
practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You
said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. What you've thought so much about has been
disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're
trapped; get yourself out of this---if you
can!"[43](#endnotes.xhtml_note-43){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-43
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
argumentative talk.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in running errands and messages. This includes
running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or princes who say: "Go here, go there. Take this, bring
that from
there."[44](#endnotes.xhtml_note-44){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-44
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
errands.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and
using material things to chase after other material
things.[45](#endnotes.xhtml_note-45){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-45
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
deceit and flattery.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

The middle section on ethics is finished.

#### 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics {.subheading}

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong
livelihood.[46](#endnotes.xhtml_note-46){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-46
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This includes such fields as limb-reading,
omenology, divining celestial portents, interpreting dreams, divining
bodily marks, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings,
ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil;
offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, palmistry; geomancy for
building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake
charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the
crow; prophesying life span, chanting for protection, and divining omens
from wild
animals.[47](#endnotes.xhtml_note-47){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-47
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears,
arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female
bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams,
chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or
deer.[48](#endnotes.xhtml_note-48){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-48
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march
back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or
vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be
defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat
for the other. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such
wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon,
or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction
or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery sky, an
earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a
setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it
also includes making predictions about the results of all such
phenomena.[49](#endnotes.xhtml_note-49){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-49
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought;
plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security
or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as
arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and
cosmology.[50](#endnotes.xhtml_note-50){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-50
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for
engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at
the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad
luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the
jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a
god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One,
breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of
luck.[51](#endnotes.xhtml_note-51){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-51
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for
the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and
consecrating house sites, and rites involving rinsing and bathing, and
oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives,
expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye
restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery
with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines,
and binding on
herbs.[52](#endnotes.xhtml_note-52){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-52
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

These are the trivial, insignificant details of mere ethics that an
ordinary person speaks of when they speak praise of the Realized One.

The longer section on ethics is finished.

### 3. Views {.subheading}

#### 3.1. Theories About the Past {.subheading}

There are other principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. Those who genuinely praise the Realized One would
rightly speak of these
things.[53](#endnotes.xhtml_note-53){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-53
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are these principles?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past, and
assert various hypotheses concerning the past on eighteen grounds. And
what are the eighteen grounds on which they rely?

##### 3.1.1. Eternalism {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists, who assert
that the self and the cosmos are eternal on four
grounds.[54](#endnotes.xhtml_note-54){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-54
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the four grounds on which they
rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their many kinds of past
lives.[55](#endnotes.xhtml_note-55){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-55
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand
rebirths. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and
details.[56](#endnotes.xhtml_note-56){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-56
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a
pillar.[57](#endnotes.xhtml_note-57){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-57
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise.[58](#endnotes.xhtml_note-58){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-58
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because by dint of keen,
resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind
I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect
my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I
know:[59](#endnotes.xhtml_note-59){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-59
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is:
one eon of the cosmos contracting and expanding; two, three, four, five,
or ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember:
'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that
was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my
life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere
else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn here.' And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and
details.[60](#endnotes.xhtml_note-60){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-60
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all
eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass
away and rearise. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my
many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I know:

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is:
ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding; twenty, thirty, or
forty eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember:
'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that
was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my
life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere
else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn here.' And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all
eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass
away and rearise. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my
many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I know:

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective:[61](#endnotes.xhtml_note-61){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-61
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are eternal,
barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They
remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and
transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This is the fourth ground on
which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the
cosmos are eternal.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self and the cosmos are eternal. Any ascetics and brahmins who
assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is
none.[62](#endnotes.xhtml_note-62){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-62
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.'[63](#endnotes.xhtml_note-63){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-63
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He understands this, and what goes beyond
this. And since he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has
realized quenching within
himself.[64](#endnotes.xhtml_note-64){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-64
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is
freed through not
grasping.[65](#endnotes.xhtml_note-65){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-65
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

The first recitation
section.[66](#endnotes.xhtml_note-66){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-66
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

##### 3.1.2. Partial Eternalism {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are partial eternalists, who
assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially
not eternal on four
grounds.[67](#endnotes.xhtml_note-67){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-67
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the four grounds on which they
rely?

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos
contracts.[68](#endnotes.xhtml_note-68){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-68
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings
are mostly headed for the realm of streaming
radiance.[69](#endnotes.xhtml_note-69){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-69
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long
time.[70](#endnotes.xhtml_note-70){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-70
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos
expands.[71](#endnotes.xhtml_note-71){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-71
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As it expands an empty mansion of divinity
appears.[72](#endnotes.xhtml_note-72){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-72
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a certain sentient being---due to the
running out of their life-span or merit---passes away from that host of
radiant deities and is reborn in that empty mansion of
divinity.[73](#endnotes.xhtml_note-73){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-73
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long time.

But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become
dissatisfied and
anxious:[74](#endnotes.xhtml_note-74){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-74
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Oh, if only other beings would come to
this place.' Then other sentient beings---due to the running out of
their life-span or merit---pass away from that host of radiant deities
and are reborn in that mansion of divinity in company with that
being.[75](#endnotes.xhtml_note-75){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-75
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they too are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long time.

Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks: 'I am the Divinity,
the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal
Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the
First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been
born and those yet to be
born.[76](#endnotes.xhtml_note-76){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-76
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These beings were created by
me\![77](#endnotes.xhtml_note-77){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-77
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because first I thought:

"Oh, if only other beings would come to this place." Such was my heart's
wish, and then these creatures came to this
place.'[78](#endnotes.xhtml_note-78){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-78
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And the beings who were reborn there later also think: 'This must be the
Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the
Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the
Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those
who have been born and those yet to be born. And we were created by him.
Why is that? Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we
arrived
later.'[79](#endnotes.xhtml_note-79){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-79
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and
illustrious than those who arrived later.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no
further.[80](#endnotes.xhtml_note-80){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-80
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'He who is the Divinity---the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher,
the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God
Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born---by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. We who were created
by that Divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to
pass away, and have come to this
place.'[81](#endnotes.xhtml_note-81){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-81
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
partially eternal.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? There are gods named
'depraved by play.' They spend too much time laughing, playing, and
making merry. And in doing so, they lose their mindfulness, and they
pass away from that host of
gods.[82](#endnotes.xhtml_note-82){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-82
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: 'The gods not depraved by play don't spend too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don't lose their
mindfulness, and don't pass away from that host of gods. They are
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for
all eternity. But we who were depraved by play spent too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our
mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods. We are impermanent,
not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this
place.'[83](#endnotes.xhtml_note-83){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-83
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
partially eternal.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? There are gods named
'malevolent'. They spend too much time gazing at each other, so they
grow angry with each other, and their bodies and minds get tired. They
pass away from that host of
gods.[84](#endnotes.xhtml_note-84){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-84
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: 'The gods who are not malevolent don't spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they don't grow angry with each other, their
bodies and minds don't get tired, and they don't pass away from that
host of gods. They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable,
remaining the same for all eternity. But we who were malevolent spent
too much time gazing at each other, we grew angry with each other, our
bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host of gods.
We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and
have come to this place.' This is the third ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
partially eternal.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'That which is called "the eye", "the ear", "the nose",
"the tongue", and also "the body": that self is impermanent, not
lasting, transient, perishable. That which is called "mind" or
"sentience" or "consciousness": that self is permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all
eternity.'[85](#endnotes.xhtml_note-85){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-85
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the fourth ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
partially eternal.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially not
eternal. Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self and the
cosmos are partially eternal and partially not eternal do so on one or
other of these four grounds. Outside of this there is none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

##### 3.1.3. The Cosmos is Finite or Infinite {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about size, and assert
that the cosmos is finite or infinite on four
grounds.[86](#endnotes.xhtml_note-86){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-86
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the four grounds on which they
rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
meditate perceiving the cosmos as
finite.[87](#endnotes.xhtml_note-87){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-87
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'The cosmos is finite and bounded. Why is that? Because by
dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right
application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a
kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as
finite.[88](#endnotes.xhtml_note-88){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-88
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of this I know:

"The cosmos is finite and bounded."' This is the first ground on which
some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is finite or
infinite.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they meditate perceiving the cosmos as
infinite.[89](#endnotes.xhtml_note-89){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-89
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'The cosmos is infinite and unbounded. The ascetics and
brahmins who say that the cosmos is finite are
wrong.[90](#endnotes.xhtml_note-90){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-90
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The cosmos is infinite and unbounded. Why
is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent
effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the
heart of such a kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as infinite.
Because of this I know:

"The cosmos is infinite and unbounded."' This is the second ground on
which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is
finite or infinite.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite
vertically but infinite
horizontally.[91](#endnotes.xhtml_note-91){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-91
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say: 'The cosmos is both finite and infinite. The ascetics and
brahmins who say that the cosmos is finite are wrong, and so are those
who say that the cosmos is infinite. The cosmos is both finite and
infinite. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and
diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion
of the heart of such a kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as
finite vertically but infinite horizontally. Because of this I know:

"The cosmos is both finite and infinite."' This is the third ground on
which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is
finite or infinite.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'The cosmos is neither finite nor
infinite.[92](#endnotes.xhtml_note-92){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-92
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetics and brahmins who say that the
cosmos is finite are wrong, as are those who say that the cosmos is
infinite, and also those who say that the cosmos is both finite and
infinite. The cosmos is neither finite nor infinite.' This is the fourth
ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the
cosmos is finite or infinite.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the cosmos is finite or infinite. Any ascetics and brahmins who
assert that the cosmos is finite or infinite do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

##### 3.1.4. Endless Flip-floppers {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are endless flip-floppers.
Whenever they're asked a question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops on four
grounds.[93](#endnotes.xhtml_note-93){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-93
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the four grounds on which they
rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is
skillful and what is
unskillful.[94](#endnotes.xhtml_note-94){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-94
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They think: 'I don't truly understand what
is skillful and what is unskillful. If I were to declare that something
was skillful or unskillful I might be wrong. That would be stressful for
me, and that stress would be an obstacle.' So from fear and disgust with
false speech they avoid stating whether something is skillful or
unskillful. Whenever they're asked a question, they resort to verbal
flip-flops and endless
flip-flops:[95](#endnotes.xhtml_note-95){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-95
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I don't say it's like this. I don't say
it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And
I don't deny it's not
so.'[96](#endnotes.xhtml_note-96){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-96
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful. They think: 'I don't truly understand what is skillful and
what is unskillful. If I were to declare that something was skillful or
unskillful I might feel desire or greed or hate or
repulsion.[97](#endnotes.xhtml_note-97){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-97
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That would be grasping on my part. That
would be stressful for me, and that stress would be an obstacle.' So
from fear and disgust with grasping they avoid stating whether something
is skillful or unskillful. Whenever they're asked a question, they
resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops: 'I don't say it's
like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I
don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so.' This is the second
ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal
flip-flops and endless flip-flops.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful. They think: 'I don't truly understand what is skillful and
what is unskillful. Suppose I were to declare that something was
skillful or unskillful. There are clever ascetics and brahmins who are
subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd
think they live to demolish convictions with their
intellect.[98](#endnotes.xhtml_note-98){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-98
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They might pursue, press, and grill me
about that. I'd be stumped by such a grilling. That would be stressful
for me, and that stress would be an obstacle.' So from fear and disgust
with examination they avoid stating whether something is skillful or
unskillful. Whenever they're asked a question, they resort to verbal
flip-flops and endless flip-flops: 'I don't say it's like this. I don't
say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so.
And I don't deny it's not so.' This is the third ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin is dull and
stupid.[99](#endnotes.xhtml_note-99){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-99
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of that, whenever they're asked a
question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops:
'Suppose you were to ask me whether there is another world. If I
believed that to be the case, I would say
so.[100](#endnotes.xhtml_note-100){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-100
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I don't say it's like this. I don't say
it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And
I don't deny it's not so. Suppose you were to ask me whether there is no
other world
...[101](#endnotes.xhtml_note-101){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-101
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there both is and is not another
world
...[102](#endnotes.xhtml_note-102){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-102
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there neither is nor is not another
world
...[103](#endnotes.xhtml_note-103){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-103
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there are beings who are reborn
spontaneously
...[104](#endnotes.xhtml_note-104){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-104
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there are not beings who are reborn
spontaneously
...[105](#endnotes.xhtml_note-105){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-105
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there both are and are not beings
who are reborn spontaneously
...[106](#endnotes.xhtml_note-106){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-106
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there neither are nor are not
beings who are reborn spontaneously
...[107](#endnotes.xhtml_note-107){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-107
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there is fruit and result of good
and bad deeds
...[108](#endnotes.xhtml_note-108){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-108
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there is no fruit and result of
good and bad deeds
...[109](#endnotes.xhtml_note-109){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-109
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there both is and is not fruit and
result of good and bad deeds
...[110](#endnotes.xhtml_note-110){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-110
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether there neither is nor is not fruit
and result of good and bad deeds
...[111](#endnotes.xhtml_note-111){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-111
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether a realized one still exists after
death
...[112](#endnotes.xhtml_note-112){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-112
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether A realized one no longer exists
after death
...[113](#endnotes.xhtml_note-113){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-113
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether a realized one both still exists
and no longer exists after death
...[114](#endnotes.xhtml_note-114){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-114
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether a Realized One neither exists nor
doesn't exist after death. If I believed that to be the case, I would
say
so.[115](#endnotes.xhtml_note-115){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-115
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I don't say it's like this. I don't say
it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And
I don't deny it's not so.' This is the fourth ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who are
flip-floppers resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops
whenever they're asked a question. Any ascetics and brahmins who resort
to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is none. The Realized One
understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

##### 3.1.5. Doctrines of Origination by Chance {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about chance. They
assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two grounds. And
what are the two grounds on which they rely?

There are gods named 'non-percipient
beings'.[116](#endnotes.xhtml_note-116){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-116
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When perception arises they pass away from
that host of gods. It's possible that one of those beings passes away
from that host and is reborn in this place. Having done so, they go
forth from the lay life to homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect
the arising of perception, but no further. They say: 'The self and the
cosmos arose by chance. Why is that? Because formerly I didn't exist,
whereas now, having not existed, I've transformed into the state of
existing." This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'The self and the cosmos arose by chance.' This is the
second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that
the self and the cosmos arose by chance.

These are the two grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about chance assert that the self and the cosmos arose by
chance. Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about chance do so on one
or other of these two grounds. Outside of this there is none. The
Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the
Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

These are the eighteen grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about the past assert various hypotheses concerning the
past.[117](#endnotes.xhtml_note-117){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-117
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize
about the past do so on one or other of these eighteen grounds. Outside
of this there is none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

The second recitation section.

#### 3.2. Theories About the Future {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the future, and
assert various hypotheses concerning the future on forty-four
grounds.[118](#endnotes.xhtml_note-118){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-118
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the forty-four grounds on
which they rely?

##### 3.2.1. Percipient Life After Death {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form on
sixteen grounds. And what are the sixteen grounds on which they rely?

They assert: 'The self is free of disease and percipient after death,
and it is formed
...[119](#endnotes.xhtml_note-119){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-119
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite ...

of unified perception ...

of diverse perception ...

of limited perception ...

of limitless perception ...

experiences nothing but happiness ...

experiences nothing but suffering ...

experiences both happiness and suffering ...

experiences neither happiness nor suffering.'

These are the sixteen grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins
assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form. Any
ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self lives on after death in a
percipient form do so on one or other of these sixteen grounds. Outside
of this there is none. The Realized One understands this ... And those
who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these
things.

##### 3.2.2. Non-Percipient Life After Death {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form
on eight grounds. And what are the eight grounds on which they rely?

They assert: 'The self is free of disease and non-percipient after
death, and it is formed
...[120](#endnotes.xhtml_note-120){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-120
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite.'

These are the eight grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form. Any
ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self lives on after death in a
non-percipient form do so on one or other of these eight grounds.
Outside of this there is none. The Realized One understands this ... And
those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these
things.

##### 3.2.3. Neither Percipient Nor Non-Percipient Life After Death {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient
nor non-percipient form on eight
grounds.[121](#endnotes.xhtml_note-121){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-121
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the eight grounds on which
they rely?

They assert: 'The self is free of disease and neither percipient nor
non-percipient after death, and it is formed ...

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite.'

These are the eight grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form. Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self
lives on after death in a neither percipient nor non-percipient form do
so on one or other of these eight grounds. Outside of this there is
none. The Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely
praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

##### 3.2.4. Annihilationism {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are annihilationists. They
assert the annihilation, eradication, and obliteration of an existing
being on seven
grounds.[122](#endnotes.xhtml_note-122){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-122
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the seven grounds on which
they rely?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'This self is formed, made up of the four principal states, and produced
by mother and father. Since it's annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly
annihilated.'[123](#endnotes.xhtml_note-123){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-123
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how some assert the annihilation of
an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny
it.[124](#endnotes.xhtml_note-124){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-124
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But that's not how *this* self becomes
rightly annihilated. There is another self that is heavenly, formed,
sensual, consuming solid
food.[125](#endnotes.xhtml_note-125){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-125
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You don't know or see that. But I know it
and see it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly
annihilated.'[126](#endnotes.xhtml_note-126){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-126
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how some assert the annihilation of
an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that is heavenly, formed, mind-made,
whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any
faculty.[127](#endnotes.xhtml_note-127){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-127
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You don't know or see that. But I know it
and see it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly annihilated.' That is how some assert the annihilation of an
existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self which has gone totally beyond
perceptions of form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not
focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite",
it's reborn in the dimension of infinite
space.[128](#endnotes.xhtml_note-128){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-128
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You don't know or see that. But I know it
and see it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly
annihilated.'[129](#endnotes.xhtml_note-129){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-129
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how some assert the annihilation of
an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self which has gone totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space. Aware that "consciousness is infinite",
it's reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. You don't know
or see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated
and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death,
that's how this self becomes rightly annihilated.' That is how some
assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that has gone totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness. Aware that "there is nothing at
all", it's been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. You don't know
or see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated
and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death,
that's how this self becomes rightly annihilated.' That is how some
assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that has gone totally beyond the
dimension of nothingness. Aware that "this is peaceful, this is
sublime", it's been reborn in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[130](#endnotes.xhtml_note-130){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-130
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You don't know or see that. But I know it
and see it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly annihilated.' That is how some assert the annihilation of an
existing being.

These are the seven grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
the annihilation, eradication, and obliteration of an existing being.
Any ascetics and brahmins who assert the annihilation, eradication, and
obliteration of an existing being do so on one or other of these seven
grounds. Outside of this there is none. The Realized One understands
this ... And those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly
speak of these things.

##### 3.2.5. Extinguishment of Suffering in the Present Life {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who speak of extinguishment in the
present life. They assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being
in the present life on five
grounds.[131](#endnotes.xhtml_note-131){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-131
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are the five grounds on which they
rely?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'When this self amuses itself, supplied and provided with the five kinds
of sensual stimulation, that's how this self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present
life.'[132](#endnotes.xhtml_note-132){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-132
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in the present life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present life. Why is that? Because sensual
pleasures are impermanent, suffering, and perishable. Their decay and
perishing give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress.[133](#endnotes.xhtml_note-133){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-133
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, this self enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's how this self
attains ultimate extinguishment in the present
life.'[134](#endnotes.xhtml_note-134){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-134
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in the present life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present
life.[135](#endnotes.xhtml_note-135){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-135
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because the placing of the
mind and the keeping it connected there are
coarse.[136](#endnotes.xhtml_note-136){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-136
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, this self enters and remains in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. That's how this self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present life.' That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in the present life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present life. Why is that? Because the rapture and
emotional elation there are coarse. But with the fading away of rapture,
this self enters and remains in the third absorption, where it meditates
with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss". That's how this self attains ultimate extinguishment in the
present life.' That is how some assert ultimate extinguishment for an
existing being in the present life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in the present life. Why is that? Because the mental
partaking of that as 'blissful' is said to be
coarse.[137](#endnotes.xhtml_note-137){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-137
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But giving up pleasure and pain, and ending
former happiness and sadness, this self enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. That's how this self attains ultimate extinguishment in the
present life.' That is how some assert ultimate extinguishment for an
existing being in the present life.

These are the five grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in the present life. Any
ascetics and brahmins who assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing
being in the present life do so on one or other of these five grounds.
Outside of this there is
none.[138](#endnotes.xhtml_note-138){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-138
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Realized One understands this ... And
those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these
things.

These are the forty-four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins
who theorize about the future assert various hypotheses concerning the
future. Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the future do so on
one or other of these forty-four grounds. Outside of this there is none.
The Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the
Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

These are the sixty-two grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about the past and the future assert various hypotheses
concerning the past and the future.

Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past or the future do
so on one or other of these sixty-two grounds. Outside of this there is
none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.'[139](#endnotes.xhtml_note-139){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-139
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He understands this, and what goes beyond
this. And since he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has
realized quenching within himself. Having truly understood the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized
One is freed through not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

### 4. The Grounds For Assertions About the Self and the Cosmos {.subheading}

#### 4.1. Anxiety and Evasiveness {.subheading}

Now, these things are only the feeling of those who do not know or see,
the anxiety and evasiveness of those under the sway of craving. Namely,
when those ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are
eternal on four grounds
...[140](#endnotes.xhtml_note-140){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-140
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

partially eternal on four grounds ...

finite or infinite on four grounds ...

or they resort to flip-flops on four grounds ...

or they assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two
grounds ...

they theorize about the past on these eighteen grounds ...

or they assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form
on sixteen grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form on eight
grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form on eight grounds ...

or they assert the annihilation of an existing being on seven grounds
...

or they assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in the
present life on five grounds ...

they theorize about the future on these forty-four grounds ...

When those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the future
on these sixty-two grounds, these things are only the feeling of those
who do not know or see, the anxiety and evasiveness of those under the
sway of craving.

#### 4.2. Conditioned by Contact {.subheading}

Now, these things are conditioned by contact. Namely, when those
ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal on
four grounds
...[141](#endnotes.xhtml_note-141){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-141
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

partially eternal on four grounds ...

finite or infinite on four grounds ...

or they resort to flip-flops on four grounds ...

or they assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two
grounds ...

they theorize about the past on these eighteen grounds ...

or they assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form
on sixteen grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form on eight
grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form on eight grounds ...

or they assert the annihilation of an existing being on seven grounds
...

or they assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in the
present life on five grounds ...

they theorize about the future on these forty-four grounds ...

When those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the future
on these sixty-two grounds, that too is conditioned by contact.

#### 4.3. Not Possible {.subheading}

Now, when those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the
future on these sixty-two grounds, it is not possible that they should
experience these things without
contact.[142](#endnotes.xhtml_note-142){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-142
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 4.4. Dependent Origination {.subheading}

Now, when those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the
future on these sixty-two grounds, all of them experience this by
repeated contact through the six fields of contact. Their feeling is a
condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is
a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to
be.[143](#endnotes.xhtml_note-143){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-143
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. The End of the Round {.subheading}

When a mendicant truly understands the six fields of contact's origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape, they understand what lies
beyond all these
things.[144](#endnotes.xhtml_note-144){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-144
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

All of these ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past or the
future are trapped in the net of these sixty-two grounds, so that
wherever they emerge they are caught and trapped in this very
net.[145](#endnotes.xhtml_note-145){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-145
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a deft fisherman or his apprentice were to cast a fine-meshed
net over a small pond. They'd think: 'Any sizable creatures in this pond
will be trapped in the net. Wherever they emerge they are caught and
trapped in this very
net.'[146](#endnotes.xhtml_note-146){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-146
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, all of these ascetics and
brahmins who theorize about the past or the future are trapped in the
net of these sixty-two grounds, so that wherever they emerge they are
caught and trapped in this very net.

The Realized One's body remains, but his conduit to rebirth has been cut
off.[147](#endnotes.xhtml_note-147){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-147
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As long as his body remains he will be seen
by gods and humans. But when his body breaks up, after life has ended,
gods and humans will see him no more.

When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to
the stalk will follow
along.[148](#endnotes.xhtml_note-148){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-148
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, the Realized One's body
remains, but his conduit to rebirth has been cut off. As long as his
body remains he will be seen by gods and humans. But when his body
breaks up, after life has ended, gods and humans will see him no more."

When he had spoken, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "It's
incredible, sir, it's amazing! What is the name of this exposition of
the teaching?"

"Well then, Ānanda, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as
'The Net of Meaning', or else 'The Net of the Teaching', or else 'The
Divine Net', or else 'The Net of Views', or else 'The Supreme Victory in
Battle'."[149](#endnotes.xhtml_note-149){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-149
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
ten-thousandfold galaxy shook.

</article>
<article id="dn2">

## [DN 2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Fruits of the Ascetic Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmaññaphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. A Discussion With the King's Ministers {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[150](#endnotes.xhtml_note-150){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-150
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha in the Mango Grove of Jīvaka Komārabhacca, together with a
large Saṅgha of 1,250
mendicants.[151](#endnotes.xhtml_note-151){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-151
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, at that time it was the sabbath---the Komudī full moon on the
fifteenth day of the fourth month---and King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son
of the princess of Videha, was sitting upstairs in the royal longhouse
surrounded by his
ministers.[152](#endnotes.xhtml_note-152){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-152
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, expressed
this heartfelt
sentiment,[153](#endnotes.xhtml_note-153){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-153
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Oh, sirs, this moonlit night is so very
delightful, so beautiful, so glorious, so lovely, so
striking.[154](#endnotes.xhtml_note-154){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-154
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, what ascetic or brahmin might I pay
homage to today, paying homage to whom my mind might find
peace?"[155](#endnotes.xhtml_note-155){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-155
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, one of the king's ministers said to
him,[156](#endnotes.xhtml_note-156){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-156
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sire, Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a
community, and tutors a community. He's a well-known and famous
religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing,
long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage
of
life.[157](#endnotes.xhtml_note-157){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-157
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept
silent.[158](#endnotes.xhtml_note-158){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-158
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Another of the king's ministers said to him, "Sire, the bamboo-staffed
ascetic Gosāla leads an order and a community, and tutors a community.
He's a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many
people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years
and has reached the final stage of
life.[159](#endnotes.xhtml_note-159){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-159
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept silent.

Another of the king's ministers said to him, "Sire, Ajita of the hair
blanket leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He's a
well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He
is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has
reached the final stage of
life.[160](#endnotes.xhtml_note-160){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-160
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept silent.

Another of the king's ministers said to him, "Sire, Pakudha Kaccāyana
leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He's a
well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He
is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has
reached the final stage of
life.[161](#endnotes.xhtml_note-161){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-161
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept silent.

Another of the king's ministers said to him, "Sire, Sañjaya
Belaṭṭhiputta leads an order and a community, and tutors a community.
He's a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many
people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years
and has reached the final stage of
life.[162](#endnotes.xhtml_note-162){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-162
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept silent.

Another of the king's ministers said to him, "Sire, the Jain ascetic of
the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a community.
He's a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many
people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years
and has reached the final stage of
life.[163](#endnotes.xhtml_note-163){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-163
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace." But when he had
spoken, the king kept silent.

### 2. A Discussion With Jīvaka Komārabhacca {.subheading}

Now at that time Jīvaka Komārabhacca was sitting silently not far from
the
king.[164](#endnotes.xhtml_note-164){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-164
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the king said to him, "But my dear
Jīvaka, why are you silent?"

"Sire, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is
staying in my mango grove together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250
mendicants.[165](#endnotes.xhtml_note-165){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-165
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened,
blessed.'[166](#endnotes.xhtml_note-166){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-166
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let Your Majesty pay homage to him.
Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace."

"Well then, my dear Jīvaka, have the elephants readied."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Jīvaka. He had around five hundred female
elephants readied, in addition to the king's bull elephant for riding.
Then he informed the king, "The elephants are ready, sire. Please go at
your convenience."

Then King Ajātasattu had women mounted on each of the five hundred
female elephants, while he mounted his bull elephant. With attendants
carrying torches, he set out in full royal pomp from Rājagaha to
Jīvaka's mango
grove.[167](#endnotes.xhtml_note-167){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-167
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But as he drew near the mango grove, the king became frightened, scared,
his hair standing on end. He said to Jīvaka, "My dear Jīvaka, I hope
you're not deceiving me! I hope you're not betraying me! I hope you're
not turning me over to my enemies! For how on earth can there be no
sound of coughing or clearing throats or any noise in such a large
Saṅgha of 1,250
mendicants?"[168](#endnotes.xhtml_note-168){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-168
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Do not fear, great king, do not fear! I am not deceiving you, or
betraying you, or turning you over to your enemies. Go forward, great
king, go forward! Those are lamps shining in the
pavilion."[169](#endnotes.xhtml_note-169){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-169
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 3. The Question About the Fruits of the Ascetic Life {.subheading}

Then King Ajātasattu rode on the elephant as far as the terrain allowed,
then descended and approached the pavilion door on foot, where he asked
Jīvaka, "But my dear Jīvaka, where is the
Buddha?"[170](#endnotes.xhtml_note-170){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-170
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That is the Buddha, great king, that is the Buddha! He's sitting
against the central column facing east, in front of the Saṅgha of
mendicants."

Then the king went up to the Buddha and stood to one
side.[171](#endnotes.xhtml_note-171){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-171
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants,
who were so very silent, like a still, clear lake, and expressed this
heartfelt sentiment, "May my son, Prince Udāyibhadda, be blessed with
such peace as the Saṅgha of mendicants now enjoys!"

"Has your mind gone to one you love, great
king?"[172](#endnotes.xhtml_note-172){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-172
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I love my son, sir, Prince Udāyibhadda. May he be blessed with such
peace as the Saṅgha of mendicants now enjoys!"

Then the king bowed to the Buddha, raised his joined palms toward the
Saṅgha, and sat down to one side. He said to the Buddha, "Sir, I'd like
to ask you about a certain point, if you'd take the time to answer."

"Ask what you wish, great king."

"Sir, there are many different professional
fields.[173](#endnotes.xhtml_note-173){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-173
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These include elephant riders, cavalry,
charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants, food servers,
warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes, leather-clad
soldiers, and sons of
bondservants.[174](#endnotes.xhtml_note-174){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-174
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They also include bakers, barbers, bathroom
attendants, cooks, garland-makers, dyers, weavers, basket-makers,
potters, accountants, finger-talliers, or those following any similar
professions. All these live off the fruits of their profession which are
apparent in this very
life.[175](#endnotes.xhtml_note-175){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-175
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With that they make themselves happy and
pleased. They make their parents, their children and partners, and their
friends and colleagues happy and pleased. And they establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to
heaven.[176](#endnotes.xhtml_note-176){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-176
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sir, can you point out a fruit of the
ascetic life that's likewise apparent in this very
life?"[177](#endnotes.xhtml_note-177){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-177
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Great king, do you recall having asked this question of other ascetics
and
brahmins?"[178](#endnotes.xhtml_note-178){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-178
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do, sir."

"If you wouldn't mind, great king, tell me how they
answered."[179](#endnotes.xhtml_note-179){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-179
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's no trouble when someone such as the Blessed One is sitting here."

"Well, speak then, great king."

#### 3.1. The Doctrine of Pūraṇa Kassapa {.subheading}

"This one time, sir, I approached Pūraṇa Kassapa and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat
down to one side, and asked him the same
question.[180](#endnotes.xhtml_note-180){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-180
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He said to me: 'Great king, the one who acts does nothing wrong when
they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when
they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they
kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated
buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. If you were
to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of
flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome
of
evil.[181](#endnotes.xhtml_note-181){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-181
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you were to go along the south bank of
the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to
do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were
to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and
encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no
outcome of merit. In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness
there is no merit or outcome of merit.'

And so, when I asked Pūraṇa Kassapa about the fruits of the ascetic life
apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of
inaction.[182](#endnotes.xhtml_note-182){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-182
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It was like someone who, when asked about a
mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit,
answered with a
mango.[183](#endnotes.xhtml_note-183){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-183
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I thought: 'How could one such as I presume
to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my
realm?'[184](#endnotes.xhtml_note-184){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-184
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I neither approved nor dismissed that
statement of Pūraṇa Kassapa. I was displeased, but did not express my
displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I got
up from my seat and
left.[185](#endnotes.xhtml_note-185){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-185
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 3.2. The Doctrine of the Bamboo-staffed Ascetic Gosāla {.subheading}

This one time, sir, I approached the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question.

He said: 'Great king, there is no cause or reason for the corruption of
sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or
reason.[186](#endnotes.xhtml_note-186){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-186
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There's no cause or reason for the
purification of sentient beings. Sentient beings are purified without
cause or reason. One does not act of one's own volition, one does not
act of another's volition, one does not act from a person's volition.
There is no power, no energy, no human strength or
vigor.[187](#endnotes.xhtml_note-187){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-187
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} All sentient beings, all living creatures,
all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by
destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in
the six classes of
rebirth.[188](#endnotes.xhtml_note-188){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-188
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are 1.4 million main wombs, and
6,000, and 600. There are 500 deeds, and five, and three. There are
deeds and half-deeds. There are 62 paths, 62 sub-eons, six classes of
rebirth, and eight stages in a person's life. There are 4,900 Ājīvaka
ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 naked ascetics. There are 2,000
faculties, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dust. There are seven
percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, and seven knotless
embryos. There are seven gods, seven humans, and seven goblins. There
are seven lakes, seven rivers, 700 rivers, seven cliffs, and 700 cliffs.
There are seven dreams and 700 dreams. There are 8.4 million great eons
through which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an
end of
suffering.[189](#endnotes.xhtml_note-189){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-189
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And here there is no such thing as this:
"By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual life I
shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds
by experiencing their results little by little," for that cannot
be.[190](#endnotes.xhtml_note-190){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-190
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Pleasure and pain are allotted.
Transmigration lasts only for a limited period, so there's no increase
or decrease, no getting better or worse. It's like how, when you toss a
ball of string, it rolls away unraveling. In the same way, after
transmigrating the foolish and the astute will make an end of
suffering.'

And so, when I asked the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla about the fruits
of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the
doctrine of purification through
transmigration.[191](#endnotes.xhtml_note-191){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-191
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It was like someone who, when asked about a
mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit,
answered with a mango. I thought: 'How could one such as I presume to
rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?' So I neither approved
nor dismissed that statement of the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla. I was
displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what
he said nor contradicting it, I got up from my seat and left.

#### 3.3. The Doctrine of Ajita of the Hair Blanket {.subheading}

This one time, sir, I approached Ajita of the hair blanket and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question.

He said: 'Great king, there is no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or
offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no
afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that
are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is
rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife
after realizing it with their own
insight.[192](#endnotes.xhtml_note-192){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-192
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This person is made up of the four
principal states. When they die, the earth in their body merges and
coalesces with the substance of earth. The water in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of water. The fire in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of fire. The air in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of air. The faculties are transferred
to
space.[193](#endnotes.xhtml_note-193){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-193
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Four men with a bier carry away the corpse.
Their footprints show the way to the cemetery. The bones become
bleached. Offerings dedicated to the gods end in ashes. Giving is a
doctrine of morons. When anyone affirms a positive teaching it's just
hollow, false nonsense. Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated
and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don't exist after death.'

And so, when I asked Ajita of the hair blanket about the fruits of the
ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine
of annihilationism. It was like someone who, when asked about a mango,
answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered
with a mango. I thought: 'How could one such as I presume to rebuke an
ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?' So I neither approved nor
dismissed that statement of Ajita of the hair blanket. I was displeased,
but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor
contradicting it, I got up from my seat and left.

#### 3.4. The Doctrine of Pakudha Kaccāyana {.subheading}

This one time, sir, I approached Pakudha Kaccāyana and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question.

He said: 'Great king, these seven substances are not made, not derived,
not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a
pillar.[194](#endnotes.xhtml_note-194){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-194
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't move or deteriorate or obstruct
each other. They're unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and
pain to each other. What seven? The substances of earth, water, fire,
air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the
seventh.[195](#endnotes.xhtml_note-195){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-195
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These seven substances are not made, not
derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain
peak, standing firm like a pillar. They don't move or deteriorate or
obstruct each other. They're unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both
pleasure and pain to each other. And here there is no-one who kills or
who makes others kill; no-one who learns or who educates others; no-one
who understands or who helps others
understand.[196](#endnotes.xhtml_note-196){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-196
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you chop off someone's head with a sharp
sword, you don't take anyone's life. The sword simply passes through the
gap between the seven substances.'

And so, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about the fruits of the ascetic
life apparent in the present life, he answered with something else
entirely. It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered
with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a
mango. I thought: 'How could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic
or brahmin living in my realm?' So I neither approved nor dismissed that
statement of Pakudha Kaccāyana. I was displeased, but did not express my
displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I got
up from my seat and left.

#### 3.5. The Doctrine of the Jain Ascetic of the Ñātika Clan {.subheading}

This one time, sir, I approached the Jain Ñātika and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat
down to one side, and asked him the same question.

He said: 'Great king, consider a Jain ascetic who is restrained in the
fourfold
constraint.[197](#endnotes.xhtml_note-197){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-197
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how is a Jain ascetic restrained in the
fourfold constraint? It's when a Jain ascetic is restrained in all that
is to be restrained, is bridled in all that is to be restrained, has
shaken off evil in all that is to be restrained, and is curbed in all
that is to be
restrained.[198](#endnotes.xhtml_note-198){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-198
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a Jain ascetic is restrained in
the fourfold constraint. When a Jain ascetic is restrained in the
fourfold constraint, they're called a knotless one who is self-realized,
self-controlled, and steadfast.'

And so, when I asked the Jain Ñātika about the fruits of the ascetic
life apparent in the present life, he answered with the fourfold
constraint. It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered
with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a
mango. I thought: 'How could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic
or brahmin living in my realm?' So I neither approved nor dismissed that
statement of the Jain Ñātika. I was displeased, but did not express my
displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I got
up from my seat and left.

#### 3.6. The Doctrine of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta {.subheading}

This one time, sir, I approached Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question.

He said: 'Suppose you were to ask me whether there is another world. If
I believed that to be the case, I would say so. But I don't say it's
like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I
don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not
so.[199](#endnotes.xhtml_note-199){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-199
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose you were to ask me whether there is
no other world ... whether there both is and is not another world ...
whether there neither is nor is not another world ... whether there are
beings who are reborn spontaneously ... whether there are no beings who
are reborn spontaneously ... whether there both are and are not beings
who are reborn spontaneously ... whether there neither are nor are not
beings who are reborn spontaneously ... whether there is fruit and
result of good and bad deeds ... whether there is no fruit and result of
good and bad deeds ... whether there both is and is not fruit and result
of good and bad deeds ... whether there neither is nor is not fruit and
result of good and bad deeds ... whether a realized one still exists
after death ... whether A realized one no longer exists after death ...
whether a realized one both still exists and no longer exists after
death ... whether a Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist after
death. If I believed that to be the case, I would say so. But I don't
say it's like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's
otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so.'

And so, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta about the fruits of the
ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with
flip-flopping. It was like someone who, when asked about a mango,
answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered
with a mango. I thought: 'This is the most foolish and stupid of all
these ascetics and brahmins! How on earth can he answer with
flip-flopping when asked about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent
in the present life?' I thought: 'How could one such as I presume to
rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?' So I neither approved
nor dismissed that statement of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta. I was displeased,
but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor
contradicting it, I got up from my seat and left.

### 4. The Fruits of the Ascetic Life {.subheading}

#### 4.1. The First Fruit of the Ascetic Life {.subheading}

And so I ask the Buddha: Sir, there are many different professional
fields. These include elephant riders, cavalry, charioteers, archers,
bannermen, adjutants, food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers,
great warriors, heroes, leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants.
They also include bakers, barbers, bathroom attendants, cooks,
garland-makers, dyers, weavers, basket-makers, potters, accountants,
finger-talliers, or those following any similar professions. All these
live off the fruits of their profession which are apparent in this very
life. With that they make themselves happy and pleased. They make their
parents, their children and partners, and their friends and colleagues
happy and pleased. And they establish an uplifting religious donation
for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive to heaven, ripens in
happiness, and leads to heaven. Sir, can you point out a fruit of the
ascetic life that's likewise apparent in this very life?"

"I can, great
king.[200](#endnotes.xhtml_note-200){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-200
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Well then, I'll ask you about this in
return, and you can answer as you
like.[201](#endnotes.xhtml_note-201){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-201
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you think, great king? Suppose you
had a person who was a bondservant, a worker. They get up before you and
go to bed after you, and are obliging, behaving nicely and speaking
politely, and gazing up at your
face.[202](#endnotes.xhtml_note-202){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-202
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd think: 'The outcome and result of
good deeds is just so incredible, so
amazing\![203](#endnotes.xhtml_note-203){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-203
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this King Ajātasattu is a human being,
and so am
I.[204](#endnotes.xhtml_note-204){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-204
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Yet he amuses himself, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god.
Whereas I'm his bondservant, his worker. I get up before him and go to
bed after him, and am obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely,
and gazing up at his face. I really should do good
deeds.[205](#endnotes.xhtml_note-205){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-205
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I shave off my hair and beard,
dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to
homelessness?'[206](#endnotes.xhtml_note-206){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-206
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After some time, that is what they do. Having gone forth they'd live
restrained in body, speech, and mind, living content with nothing more
than food and clothes, delighting in
seclusion.[207](#endnotes.xhtml_note-207){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-207
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And suppose your men were to report all
this to you. Would you say to them: 'Bring that person to me! Let them
once more be my bondservant, my worker'?"

"No, sir. Rather, I would bow to them, rise in their presence, and offer
them a seat. I'd invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. And I'd organize their lawful
guarding and
protection."[208](#endnotes.xhtml_note-208){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-208
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, great king? If this is so, is there a fruit of the
ascetic life apparent in the present life or
not?"[209](#endnotes.xhtml_note-209){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-209
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Clearly, sir, there
is."[210](#endnotes.xhtml_note-210){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-210
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This is the first fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent in this
very life, which I point out to you."

#### 4.2. The Second Fruit of the Ascetic Life {.subheading}

"But sir, can you point out another fruit of the ascetic life that's
likewise apparent in this very
life?"[211](#endnotes.xhtml_note-211){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-211
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I can, great king. Well then, I'll ask you about this in return, and
you can answer as you like. What do you think, great king? Suppose you
had a person who was a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who
builds up their
capital.[212](#endnotes.xhtml_note-212){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-212
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd think: 'The outcome and result of
good deeds is just so incredible, so amazing! For this King Ajātasattu
is a human being, and so am I. Yet he amuses himself, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god.
Whereas I'm a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds
up their capital. I really should do good deeds. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?'

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or
small family circle. They'd shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[213](#endnotes.xhtml_note-213){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-213
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having gone forth they'd live restrained in
body, speech, and mind, living content with nothing more than food and
clothes, delighting in seclusion. And suppose your men were to report
all this to you. Would you say to them: 'Bring that person to me! Let
them once more be a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who
builds up their capital'?"

"No, sir. Rather, I would bow to them, rise in their presence, and offer
them a seat. I'd invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. And I'd organize their lawful
guarding and protection."

"What do you think, great king? If this is so, is there a fruit of the
ascetic life apparent in the present life or not?"

"Clearly, sir, there is."

"This is the second fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent in this
very life, which I point out to you."

#### 4.3. The Finer Fruits of the Ascetic Life {.subheading}

"But sir, can you point out a fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent
in this very life which is better and finer than these?"

"I can, great king. Well then, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."[214](#endnotes.xhtml_note-214){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-214
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied the king.

The Buddha said this:

"Consider when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened,
blessed.[215](#endnotes.xhtml_note-215){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-215
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others.[216](#endnotes.xhtml_note-216){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-216
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and
pure.[217](#endnotes.xhtml_note-217){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-217
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good
family.[218](#endnotes.xhtml_note-218){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-218
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?'

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or
small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they live restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They act skillfully by body and speech. They're purified in livelihood
and accomplished in ethical conduct. They guard the sense doors, have
mindfulness and situational awareness, and are
content.[219](#endnotes.xhtml_note-219){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-219
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

##### 4.3.1. Ethics {.subheading}

###### 4.3.1.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics {.subheading}

And how, great king, is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a
mendicant gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the
sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all
living
beings.[220](#endnotes.xhtml_note-220){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-220
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This pertains to their ethics.

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving.[221](#endnotes.xhtml_note-221){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-221
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This pertains to their ethics.

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of
sex.[222](#endnotes.xhtml_note-222){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-222
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This pertains to their ethics.

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and dependable, and don't trick the world with their
words.[223](#endnotes.xhtml_note-223){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-223
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This pertains to their ethics.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. This
pertains to their ethics.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people. This pertains to their ethics.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
This pertains to their ethics.

They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the
day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They
refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They refrain
from beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and
makeup. They refrain from high and luxurious
beds.[224](#endnotes.xhtml_note-224){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-224
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They refrain from receiving gold and
currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and girls, male and female
bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants, cows,
horses, and mares, and fields and land. They refrain from running
errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights, metals, or
measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder,
abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. This pertains to their
ethics.

The shorter section on ethics is finished.

###### 4.3.1.2. The Middle Section on Ethics {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds. These include plants
propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or joints; and those from
regular seeds as the fifth. They refrain from such injury to plants and
seeds. This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use. This includes
such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and
things of the flesh. They refrain from storing up such goods. This
pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in seeing shows. This includes such things as
dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping,
gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and
bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants,
horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails;
staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed
forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. They refrain from
such shows. This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. This includes
such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air,
hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice,
leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts,
toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another's thoughts,
and imitating musical instruments. They refrain from such gambling. This
pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. This includes such
things as sofas, couches, woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white,
embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double-or
single-fringed---and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken
sheets, woven carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope
hide rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
cushions at both ends. They refrain from such bedding. This pertains to
their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. This includes such things as applying
beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors,
ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation,
bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers,
parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed
white robes. They refrain from such beautification and adornment. This
pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as talk about
kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars;
talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and
fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and
countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk
about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about
being reborn in this or that place. They refrain from such low talk.
This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in arguments. They say such things as: 'You don't
understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and
training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You're
practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You
said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. What you've thought so much about has been
disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're
trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!' They refrain from such
argumentative talk. This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in running errands and messages. This includes
running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or princes who say: 'Go here, go there. Take this, bring
that from there.' They refrain from such errands. This pertains to their
ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and
using material things to chase after other material things. They refrain
from such deceit and flattery. This pertains to their ethics.

The middle section on ethics is finished.

###### 4.3.1.3. The Long Section on Ethics {.subheading}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes such fields as limb-reading, omenology, divining celestial
portents, interpreting dreams, divining bodily marks, divining holes in
cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of
husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood
sacrifices, palmistry; geomancy for building sites, fields, and
cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of
the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying life span,
chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. They
refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to
their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears,
arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female
bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams,
chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. They
refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to
their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march
back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or
vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be
defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat
for the other. They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.
This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon,
or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction
or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery sky, an
earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a
setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it
also includes making predictions about the results of all such
phenomena. They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This
pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought;
plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security
or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as
arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. They refrain
from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to their
ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for
engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at
the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad
luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the
jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a
god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One,
breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. They refrain
from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to their
ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for
the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and
consecrating house sites, and rites involving rinsing and bathing, and
oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives,
expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye
restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery
with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines,
and binding on herbs. They refrain from such low lore, such wrong
livelihood. This pertains to their ethics.

A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their ethical restraint. It's like a king who has defeated
his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. In the same
way, a mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any
quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. When they have this
entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness
inside
themselves.[225](#endnotes.xhtml_note-225){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-225
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant is accomplished in
ethics.

The longer section on ethics is finished.

##### 4.3.2. Immersion {.subheading}

###### 4.3.2.1. Sense Restraint {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant guard the sense
doors?[226](#endnotes.xhtml_note-226){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-226
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
its
restraint.[227](#endnotes.xhtml_note-227){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-227
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they have this noble
sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside
themselves.[228](#endnotes.xhtml_note-228){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-228
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant guards the sense
doors.

###### 4.3.2.2. Mindfulness and Situational Awareness {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant have mindfulness and situational
awareness?[229](#endnotes.xhtml_note-229){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-229
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant acts with situational
awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside;
when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl
and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating
and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking,
speaking, and keeping
silent.[230](#endnotes.xhtml_note-230){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-230
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant has mindfulness and
situational awareness.

###### 4.3.2.3. Contentment {.subheading}

And how is a mendicant content? It's when a mendicant is content with
robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly.
Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things.[231](#endnotes.xhtml_note-231){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-231
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're like a bird: wherever it flies,
wings are its only burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with
robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly.
Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. That's how a
mendicant is content.

###### 4.3.2.4. Giving Up the Hindrances {.subheading}

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense
restraint, this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, and this
noble
contentment,[232](#endnotes.xhtml_note-232){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-232
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they frequent a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal,
they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body
straight, and establish mindfulness in their
presence.[233](#endnotes.xhtml_note-233){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-233
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of
covetousness.[234](#endnotes.xhtml_note-234){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-234
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up ill will and malevolence, they
meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living
beings, cleansing the mind of ill
will.[235](#endnotes.xhtml_note-235){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-235
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they
meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light,
mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and
drowsiness.[236](#endnotes.xhtml_note-236){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-236
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and
remorse.[237](#endnotes.xhtml_note-237){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-237
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone
beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind
of
doubt.[238](#endnotes.xhtml_note-238){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-238
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to
work,[239](#endnotes.xhtml_note-239){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-239
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and his efforts proved successful. He would
pay off the original loan and have enough left over to support his
partner. Thinking about this, he'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They'd
lose their appetite and get physically weak. But after some time they'd
recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength.
Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. But after some time they were
released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. Thinking
about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master,
but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. But after some
time they'd be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not
indentured to another, an emancipated individual able to go where they
wish. Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling
along a desert road, which was perilous, with nothing to eat. But after
some time they crossed over the desert safely, arriving within a
village, a sanctuary free of peril. Thinking about this, they'd be
filled with joy and happiness.

In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up
inside themselves, a mendicant regards them thus as a debt, a disease, a
prison, slavery, and a desert
crossing.[240](#endnotes.xhtml_note-240){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-240
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a
mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from
prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at
last.[241](#endnotes.xhtml_note-241){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-241
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes
immersed.[242](#endnotes.xhtml_note-242){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-242
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

###### 4.3.2.5. First Absorption {.subheading}

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it
connected.[243](#endnotes.xhtml_note-243){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-243
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion.[244](#endnotes.xhtml_note-244){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-244
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes
out.[245](#endnotes.xhtml_note-245){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-245
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of seclusion. This, great king, is a fruit of the ascetic
life that's apparent in the present life which is better and finer than
the former
ones.[246](#endnotes.xhtml_note-246){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-246
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

###### 4.3.2.6. Second Absorption {.subheading}

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without applying the mind and keeping it
connected.[247](#endnotes.xhtml_note-247){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-247
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion.

It's like a deep lake fed by spring water. There's no inlet to the east,
west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers
from time to
time.[248](#endnotes.xhtml_note-248){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-248
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the stream of cool water welling up in
the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake.
There's no part of the lake that's not spread through with cool
water.[249](#endnotes.xhtml_note-249){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-249
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. This
too, great king, is a fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent in the
present life which is better and finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.2.7. Third Absorption {.subheading}

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.'[250](#endnotes.xhtml_note-250){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-250
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with bliss free of rapture. There's no part of the body that's not
spread with bliss free of rapture.

It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some
of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not soaked
with cool
water.[251](#endnotes.xhtml_note-251){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-251
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture. This too, great king, is a fruit of the ascetic life that's
apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former
ones.

###### 4.3.2.8. Fourth Absorption {.subheading}

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.[252](#endnotes.xhtml_note-252){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-252
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They sit spreading their body through with
pure bright mind. There's no part of the body that's not spread with
pure bright
mind.[253](#endnotes.xhtml_note-253){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-253
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth.
There's no part of the body that's not spread over with white
cloth.[254](#endnotes.xhtml_note-254){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-254
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, they sit spreading their
body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of the body that's
not spread with pure bright mind. This too, great king, is a fruit of
the ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is better and
finer than the former ones.

##### 4.3.3. The Eight Knowledges {.subheading}

###### 4.3.3.1. Knowledge and Vision {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge and
vision.[255](#endnotes.xhtml_note-255){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-255
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'This body of mine is
formed. It's made up of the four principal states, produced by mother
and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to
wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and
destruction.[256](#endnotes.xhtml_note-256){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-256
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this consciousness of mine is attached
to it, tied to
it.'[257](#endnotes.xhtml_note-257){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-257
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it was strung with a thread of blue,
yellow, red, white, or golden
brown.[258](#endnotes.xhtml_note-258){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-258
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And someone with clear eyes were to take it
in their hand and check it: 'This beryl gem is naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it's strung with a thread of blue, yellow,
red, white, or golden brown.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge and
vision.[259](#endnotes.xhtml_note-259){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-259
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too, great king, is a fruit of the
ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is better and
finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.2. Mind-Made Body {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward the creation of a
mind-made
body.[260](#endnotes.xhtml_note-260){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-260
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this body they create another
body---formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not
deficient in any
faculty.[261](#endnotes.xhtml_note-261){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-261
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. They'd think:
'This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are
different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.' Or
suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. They'd
think: 'This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the
scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the
scabbard.' Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough.
They'd think: 'This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the
slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the
slough.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward the creation of a mind-made body. From this body they create
another body---formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs,
not deficient in any faculty. This too, great king, is a fruit of the
ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is better and
finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.3. Psychic Powers {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward psychic
power.[262](#endnotes.xhtml_note-262){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-262
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again; appearing and
disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a
mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it
were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged
through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun
and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the
realm of
divinity.[263](#endnotes.xhtml_note-263){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-263
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay.
They could produce any kind of pot that they
like.[264](#endnotes.xhtml_note-264){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-264
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their
apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of
ivory item that they like. Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their
apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of
gold item that they
like.[265](#endnotes.xhtml_note-265){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-265
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward psychic power. This too, great king, is a fruit of the ascetic
life that's apparent in the present life which is better and finer than
the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.4. Clairaudience {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward
clairaudience.[266](#endnotes.xhtml_note-266){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-266
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or
far.[267](#endnotes.xhtml_note-267){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-267
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They'd hear the
sound of drums, clay drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms. They'd
think: 'That's the sound of drums,' and 'that's the sound of clay
drums,' and 'that's the sound of horns, kettledrums, and
tom-toms.'[268](#endnotes.xhtml_note-268){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-268
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward clairaudience. With clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far. This too, great king, is a fruit of the ascetic life that's
apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former
ones.

###### 4.3.3.5. Comprehending the Minds of Others {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward comprehending the
minds of
others.[269](#endnotes.xhtml_note-269){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-269
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand the minds of other beings
and individuals, having comprehended them with their own mind. They
understand mind with greed as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed
as 'mind without greed'. They understand mind with hate ... mind without
hate ... mind with delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted
mind ... scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind
that is not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... immersed mind ...
unimmersed mind ... freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as
'unfreed mind'.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they'd know 'I have a
spot,' and if they had no spots they'd know 'I have no
spots.'[270](#endnotes.xhtml_note-270){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-270
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, when their mind has become
immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward comprehending the minds of others. They
understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. This too, great king, is a fruit
of the ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is better
and finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.6. Recollection of Past Lives {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward recollection of
past
lives.[271](#endnotes.xhtml_note-271){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-271
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They recollect many kinds of past lives,
that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the
world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the
world contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named
this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This
was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I
passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I
was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my
food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life
ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so
they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.[272](#endnotes.xhtml_note-272){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-272
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another
village. From that village they'd go to yet another village. And from
that village they'd return to their home village. They'd think: 'I went
from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat
like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village
I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like
that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I
returned to my home
village.'[273](#endnotes.xhtml_note-273){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-273
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward recollection of past lives. This too, great king, is a fruit of
the ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is better and
finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.7. Clairvoyance {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the
death and rebirth of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified
and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they
chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right
view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds.[274](#endnotes.xhtml_note-274){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-274
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with
clear eyes standing there might see people entering and leaving a house,
walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.
They'd think: 'These are people entering and leaving a house, walking
along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central
square.'[275](#endnotes.xhtml_note-275){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-275
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. This too,
great king, is a fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent in the
present life which is better and finer than the former ones.

###### 4.3.3.8. Ending of Defilements {.subheading}

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the
ending of
defilements.[276](#endnotes.xhtml_note-276){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-276
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They truly understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.[277](#endnotes.xhtml_note-277){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-277
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They truly understand: 'These are
defilements' ... 'This is the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the
cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of
defilements'.[278](#endnotes.xhtml_note-278){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-278
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is
freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance.[279](#endnotes.xhtml_note-279){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-279
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they're freed, they know they're
freed.[280](#endnotes.xhtml_note-280){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-280
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the
spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done,
there is nothing further for this
place.'[281](#endnotes.xhtml_note-281){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-281
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent,
clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank
would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of
fish swimming about or staying still. They'd think: 'This lake is
transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels,
and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying
still.'[282](#endnotes.xhtml_note-282){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-282
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. This too, great king, is
a fruit of the ascetic life that's apparent in the present life which is
better and finer than the former ones. And, great king, there is no
other fruit of the ascetic life apparent in the present life which is
better and finer than
this."[283](#endnotes.xhtml_note-283){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-283
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. Ajātasattu Declares Himself a Lay Follower {.subheading}

When the Buddha had spoken, King Ajātasattu said to him, "Excellent,
sir!
Excellent\![284](#endnotes.xhtml_note-284){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-284
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the
Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the
Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[285](#endnotes.xhtml_note-285){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-285
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.

I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me
to take the life of my father, a just and principled king, for the sake
of
authority.[286](#endnotes.xhtml_note-286){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-286
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it
is, so I will restrain myself in
future."[287](#endnotes.xhtml_note-287){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-287
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed, great king, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to take the life of your father, a just and principled
king, for the sake of
sovereignty.[288](#endnotes.xhtml_note-288){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-288
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But since you have recognized your mistake
for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. For it is
growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what
it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future."[289](#endnotes.xhtml_note-289){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-289
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the Buddha had spoken, King Ajātasattu said to him, "Well, now,
sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience."

Then the king, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, got
up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled him, keeping him on
his right, before leaving.

Soon after the king had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "The
king is broken,
mendicants,[290](#endnotes.xhtml_note-290){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-290
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} he is ruined. If he had not taken the life
of his father, a just and principled king, the stainless, immaculate
vision of the Dhamma would have arisen in him in that very
seat."[291](#endnotes.xhtml_note-291){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-291
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn3">

## [DN 3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ambaṭṭha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ambaṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[292](#endnotes.xhtml_note-292){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-292
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
five hundred mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan
brahmins named
Icchānaṅgala.[293](#endnotes.xhtml_note-293){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-293
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He stayed in a forest near Icchānaṅgala.

### 1. The Section on Pokkharasāti {.subheading}

Now at that time the brahmin Pokkharasāti was living in Ukkaṭṭhā. It was
a crown property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala, teeming with living
creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park endowed to
a
brahmin.[294](#endnotes.xhtml_note-294){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-294
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Pokkharasāti heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala and is staying in a forest nearby.
He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own insight
this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others.[295](#endnotes.xhtml_note-295){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-295
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected
ones."[296](#endnotes.xhtml_note-296){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-296
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. The Student Ambaṭṭha {.subheading}

Now at that time Pokkharasāti had a student named Ambaṭṭha as his
resident pupil. He was one who recited and remembered the hymns, and had
mastered in the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well
versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. He had been authorized
as a master in his own tutor's scriptural heritage of the three Vedas
with the
words:[297](#endnotes.xhtml_note-297){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-297
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "What I know, you
know.[298](#endnotes.xhtml_note-298){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-298
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what you know, I know."

Then Pokkharasāti addressed Ambaṭṭha, "Dear Ambaṭṭha, the ascetic
Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---has arrived at
Icchānaṅgala and is staying in a forest nearby. He has this good
reputation ... It's good to see such perfected ones. Please, dear
Ambaṭṭha, go to the ascetic Gotama and find out whether or not he lives
up to his reputation. Through you I shall learn about Mister
Gotama."[299](#endnotes.xhtml_note-299){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-299
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how shall I find out whether or not the ascetic Gotama lives
up to his reputation?"

"Dear Ambaṭṭha, the thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed
down in our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible
destinies, no
other.[300](#endnotes.xhtml_note-300){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-300
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven
treasures.[301](#endnotes.xhtml_note-301){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-301
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder,
and the commander as the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons
who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his
enemies.[302](#endnotes.xhtml_note-302){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-302
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} After conquering this land girt by sea, he
reigns by principle, without rod or sword. But if he goes forth from the
lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. But, dear Ambaṭṭha, I am
the one who gives the
hymns,[303](#endnotes.xhtml_note-303){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-303
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and you are the one who receives them."

"Yes, sir," replied Ambaṭṭha. He got up from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled Pokkharasāti, keeping him to his right. He mounted
a chariot drawn by mares and, together with several young students, set
out for the forest near
Icchānaṅgala.[304](#endnotes.xhtml_note-304){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-304
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot.

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open
air.[305](#endnotes.xhtml_note-305){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-305
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the student Ambaṭṭha went up to those
mendicants and said, "Good sirs, where is Mister Gotama at
present?[306](#endnotes.xhtml_note-306){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-306
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For we have come here to see
him."[307](#endnotes.xhtml_note-307){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-307
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then those mendicants thought, "This Ambaṭṭha is from a well-known
family, and he is the pupil of the well-known brahmin Pokkharasāti. The
Buddha won't mind having a discussion together with such
gentlemen."[308](#endnotes.xhtml_note-308){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-308
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They said to Ambaṭṭha, "Ambaṭṭha, that's his dwelling, with the door
closed. Approach it quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear
your throat, and knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the
door."[309](#endnotes.xhtml_note-309){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-309
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So he approached the Buddha's dwelling, cleared his throat and knocked
on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door. Ambaṭṭha and the
young students entered the dwelling. The young students exchanged
greetings with the Buddha, and when the greetings and polite
conversation were over, sat down to one side. But while the Buddha was
sitting, Ambaṭṭha spoke some polite words or other while walking around
or standing.

So the Buddha said to him, "Ambaṭṭha, is this how you hold a discussion
with elderly and senior brahmins, the tutors of tutors: walking around
or standing while I'm sitting, speaking some polite words or
other?"[310](#endnotes.xhtml_note-310){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-310
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 2.1. The First Use of the Word "Primitives" {.subheading}

"No, Mister Gotama. For it is proper for one brahmin to converse with
another while both are walking, standing, sitting, or lying down. But as
to these shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the
feet of our kinsman, I converse with them as I do with Mister
Gotama."[311](#endnotes.xhtml_note-311){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-311
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Ambaṭṭha, you must have come here for some purpose. You should
focus on that. Though this Ambaṭṭha is unqualified, he thinks he's
qualified. What is that but lack of
qualifications?"[312](#endnotes.xhtml_note-312){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-312
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Ambaṭṭha became angry and upset with the Buddha
because of being described as unqualified. He even attacked and
badmouthed the Buddha himself, saying, "The ascetic Gotama will be
worsted!" He said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, the Sakyans are rude,
harsh, touchy, and
argumentative.[313](#endnotes.xhtml_note-313){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-313
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Primitive they are, and primitive they
remain! They don't honor, respect, revere, worship, or venerate
brahmins.[314](#endnotes.xhtml_note-314){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-314
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is neither proper nor appropriate that
the Sakyans---primitives that they are---don't honor, respect, revere,
worship, or venerate brahmins."

And that's how Ambaṭṭha denigrated the Sakyans with the word
"primitives" for the first time.

#### 2.2. The Second Use of the Word "Primitives" {.subheading}

"But Ambaṭṭha, how have the Sakyans wronged you?"

"This one time, Mister Gotama, I went to Kapilavatthu on some business
for my tutor, the brahmin Pokkharasāti. I approached the Sakyans in
their town hall. Now at that time several Sakyans and Sakyan princes
were sitting on high seats, poking each other with their fingers,
giggling and playing together. In fact, they even presumed to giggle at
me, and didn't invite me to a seat. It is neither proper nor appropriate
that the Sakyans---primitives that they are---don't honor, respect,
revere, worship, or venerate brahmins."

And that's how Ambaṭṭha denigrated the Sakyans with the word
"primitives" for the second time.

#### 2.3. The Third Use of the Word "Primitives" {.subheading}

"Even a little quail, Ambaṭṭha, speaks as she likes in her own nest.
Kapilavatthu is the Sakyans' own place, Ambaṭṭha. It's not worthy of the
Venerable Ambaṭṭha to lose his temper over such a small
thing."[315](#endnotes.xhtml_note-315){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-315
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mister Gotama, there are these four classes: aristocrats, brahmins,
peasants, and menials. Three of these classes---aristocrats, peasants,
and menials---in fact succeed only when serving the brahmins. It is
neither proper nor appropriate that the Sakyans---primitives that they
are---don't honor, respect, revere, worship, or venerate brahmins."

And that's how Ambaṭṭha denigrated the Sakyans with the word
"primitives" for the third time.

#### 2.4. The Word "Son of a Slavegirl" is Used {.subheading}

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "This Ambaṭṭha puts the Sakyans down way
too much by calling them primitives. Why don't I ask him about his own
clan?"

So the Buddha said to him, "What is your clan,
Ambaṭṭha?"[316](#endnotes.xhtml_note-316){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-316
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I am a Kaṇhāyana, Mister
Gotama."[317](#endnotes.xhtml_note-317){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-317
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But, recollecting the ancient name and clan of your mother and father,
the Sakyans were the children of the masters, while you're descended
from the son of a slavegirl of the
Sakyans.[318](#endnotes.xhtml_note-318){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-318
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the Sakyans regard King Okkāka as their
grandfather.[319](#endnotes.xhtml_note-319){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-319
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Once upon a time, King Okkāka, wishing to divert the royal succession to
the son of his most beloved queen, banished the elder princes from the
realm---Okkāmukha, Karakaṇḍa, Hatthinika, and Sinisūra. They made their
home beside a lotus pond on the slopes of the Himalayas, where there was
a large grove of *sakhua*
trees.[320](#endnotes.xhtml_note-320){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-320
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For fear of breaking their line of birth,
they slept with their own (*saka*)
sisters.[321](#endnotes.xhtml_note-321){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-321
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then King Okkāka addressed his ministers and councillors, 'Where, sirs,
have the princes settled
now?'[322](#endnotes.xhtml_note-322){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-322
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Sire, there is a lotus pond on the slopes of the Himalayas, by a large
grove of *sakhua* trees. They've settled there. For fear of breaking
their line of birth, they are sleeping with their own sisters.'

Then, Ambaṭṭha, King Okkāka expressed this heartfelt sentiment: 'The
princes are indeed Sakyans! The princes are indeed the best
Sakyans!'[323](#endnotes.xhtml_note-323){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-323
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From that day on the Sakyans were
recognized and he was their founder.

Now, King Okkāka had a slavegirl named
Disā.[324](#endnotes.xhtml_note-324){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-324
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} She gave birth to a boy named
"Black".[325](#endnotes.xhtml_note-325){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-325
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he was born, Black Boy said: 'Wash me,
mum, bathe me! Get this filth off of me! I will be useful for
you!'[326](#endnotes.xhtml_note-326){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-326
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whereas these days when people see goblins
they recognize them as goblins, in those days they recognized goblins as
'blackboys'.

They said: 'He spoke as soon as he was born---a blackboy is born! A
goblin is born!' From that day on the Kaṇhāyanas were proclaimed, and he
was their founder. That's how, recollecting the ancient name and clan of
your mother and father, the Sakyans were the children of the masters,
while you're descended from the son of a slavegirl of the Sakyans."

When he said this, those young students said to him, "Mister Gotama,
please don't put Ambaṭṭha down too much by calling him the son of a
slavegirl.[327](#endnotes.xhtml_note-327){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-327
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He's well-born, a gentleman, learned, a
good speaker, and astute. He is capable of debating with Mister Gotama
about this."

So the Buddha said to them, "Well, young students, if you think that
Ambaṭṭha is ill-born, not a gentleman, unlearned, a poor speaker,
witless, and not capable of debating with me about this, then leave him
aside and you can debate with me. But if you think that he's well-born,
a gentleman, learned, a good speaker, astute, and capable of debating
with me about this, then you should stand aside and let him debate with
me."

"He is capable of debating you. We will be silent, and let Ambaṭṭha
debate with Mister Gotama about this."

So the Buddha said to Ambaṭṭha, "Well, Ambaṭṭha, there's a legitimate
question that comes up. You won't like it, but you ought to answer
anyway. If you fail to answer---by dodging the issue, remaining silent,
or leaving---your head will explode into seven pieces right
here.[328](#endnotes.xhtml_note-328){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-328
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? According to
what you have heard from elderly and senior brahmins, the tutors of
tutors, what is the origin of the Kaṇhāyanas, and who is their founder?"

When he said this, Ambaṭṭha kept silent.

For a second time, the Buddha put the question, and for a second time
Ambaṭṭha kept silent.

So the Buddha said to him, "Answer now, Ambaṭṭha. Now is not the time
for silence. If someone fails to answer a legitimate question when asked
three times by the Buddha, their head explodes into seven pieces there
and then."

Now at that time the spirit Vajirapāṇī, holding a massive iron spear,
burning, blazing, and glowing, stood in the air above Ambaṭṭha,
thinking,[329](#endnotes.xhtml_note-329){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-329
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "If this Ambaṭṭha doesn't answer when asked
a third time, I'll blow his head into seven pieces there and then!" And
both the Buddha and Ambaṭṭha could see Vajirapāṇī.

Ambaṭṭha was terrified, shocked, and awestruck. Looking to the Buddha
for shelter, protection, and refuge, he sat down close by the Buddha and
said, "What did you say? Please repeat the question."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? According to what you have heard from
elderly and senior brahmins, the tutors of tutors, what is the origin of
the Kaṇhāyanas, and who is their founder?"

"I have heard, Mister Gotama, that it is just as you say. That's the
origin of the Kaṇhāyanas, and that's who their founder is."

#### 2.5. The Discussion of Ambaṭṭha's Heritage {.subheading}

When he said this, those young students made an uproar, "It turns out
Ambaṭṭha is ill-born, not a gentleman, son of a Sakyan slavegirl, and
that the Sakyans are sons of his masters! And it seems that the ascetic
Gotama spoke only the truth, though we presumed to rebuke him!"

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "These young students put Ambaṭṭha down
too much by calling him the son of a slavegirl. Why don't I get him out
of this?"

So the Buddha said to the young students, "Young students, please don't
put Ambaṭṭha down too much by calling him the son of a slavegirl. That
Black Boy was an eminent
sage.[330](#endnotes.xhtml_note-330){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-330
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went to a southern country and memorized
the Divine Spell. Then he approached King Okkāka and asked for the hand
of his daughter
Maddarūpī.[331](#endnotes.xhtml_note-331){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-331
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The king said to him, 'Who the hell is this son of a slavegirl to ask
for the hand of my daughter!' Angry and upset he fastened a razor-tipped
arrow.[332](#endnotes.xhtml_note-332){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-332
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But he wasn't able to either shoot it or to
relax it.

Then the ministers and councillors approached the sage Black Boy and
said: 'Spare the king, sir, spare him!'

'The king will be safe. But if he shoots the arrow downwards, there will
be an earthquake across the entire
realm.'[333](#endnotes.xhtml_note-333){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-333
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Spare the king, sir, and spare the country!'

'Both king and country will be safe. But if he shoots the arrow upwards,
there will be no rain in the entire realm for seven years.'

'Spare the king, sir, spare the country, and let there be
rain!'[334](#endnotes.xhtml_note-334){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-334
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Both king and country will be safe, and the rain will fall. And if the
king shoots the crown prince with an arrow, he will be safe and
unruffled.'[335](#endnotes.xhtml_note-335){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-335
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So the ministers said to
Okkāka:[336](#endnotes.xhtml_note-336){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-336
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Okkāka must shoot the crown prince with an
arrow. He will be safe and unruffled.'

So King Okkāka shot the crown prince with an arrow. And he was safe and
unruffled. Then the king was terrified, shocked, and awestruck. Scared
by the divine punishment, he gave the hand of his daughter
Maddarūpī.[337](#endnotes.xhtml_note-337){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-337
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Young students, please don't put Ambaṭṭha down too much by calling him
the son of a slavegirl. That Black Boy was an eminent sage."

### 3. The Supremacy of the Aristocrats {.subheading}

Then the Buddha addressed Ambaṭṭha, "What do you think, Ambaṭṭha?
Suppose an aristocrat boy was to sleep with a brahmin girl, and they had
a son. Would he receive a seat and water from the brahmins?"

"He would, Mister Gotama."

"And would the brahmins feed him at an offering of food for ancestors,
an offering of a dish of milk-rice, a sacrifice, or a feast for guests?"

"They would."

"And would the brahmins teach him the hymns or not?"

"They would."

"And would he be kept from the women or
not?"[338](#endnotes.xhtml_note-338){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-338
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"He would not."

"And would the aristocrats anoint him as king?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because his maternity is unsuitable."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Suppose a brahmin boy was to sleep with an
aristocrat girl, and they had a son. Would he receive a seat and water
from the brahmins?"

"He would, Mister Gotama."

"And would the brahmins feed him at an offering of food for ancestors,
an offering of a dish of milk-rice, a sacrifice, or a feast for guests?"

"They would."

"And would the brahmins teach him the hymns or not?"

"They would."

"And would he be kept from the women or not?"

"He would not."

"And would the aristocrats anoint him as king?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because his paternity is unsuitable."

"And so, Ambaṭṭha, the aristocrats are superior and the brahmins
inferior, whether comparing women with women or men with men. What do
you think, Ambaṭṭha? Suppose the brahmins for some reason were to shave
a brahmin's head, inflict him with a sack of ashes, and banish him from
the nation or the city. Would he receive a seat and water from the
brahmins?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"And would the brahmins feed him at an offering of food for ancestors,
an offering of a dish of milk-rice, a sacrifice, or a feast for guests?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"And would the brahmins teach him the hymns or not?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"And would he be kept from the women or not?"

"He would be."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Suppose the aristocrats for some reason
were to shave an aristocrat's head, inflict him with a sack of ashes,
and banish him from the nation or the city. Would he receive a seat and
water from the brahmins?"

"He would, Mister Gotama."

"And would the brahmins feed him at an offering of food for ancestors,
an offering of a dish of milk-rice, a sacrifice, or a feast for guests?"

"They would."

"And would the brahmins teach him the hymns or not?"

"They would."

"And would he be kept from the women or not?"

"He would not."

"At this point, Ambaṭṭha, that aristocrat has reached rock bottom, with
head shaven, inflicted with a sack of ashes, and banished from city or
nation. Yet still the aristocrats are superior and the brahmins
inferior. The divinity Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this
verse:[339](#endnotes.xhtml_note-339){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-339
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans.'

That verse was well sung by the Divinity Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung;
well spoken, not poorly spoken, beneficial, not harmful, and it was
approved by me. For I also say this:

> The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans."

The first recitation section.

### 4. Knowledge and Conduct {.subheading}

"But what, Mister Gotama, is that conduct, and what is that
knowledge?"[340](#endnotes.xhtml_note-340){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-340
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Ambaṭṭha, in the supreme knowledge and conduct there is no discussion
of genealogy or clan or
pride---[341](#endnotes.xhtml_note-341){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-341
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'You deserve me' or 'You don't deserve me.'
Wherever there is giving and taking in marriage there is such
discussion. Whoever is attached to questions of genealogy or clan or
pride, or to giving and taking in marriage, is far from the supreme
knowledge and conduct. The realization of supreme knowledge and conduct
occurs when you've given up such
things."[342](#endnotes.xhtml_note-342){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-342
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what, Mister Gotama, is that conduct, and what is that knowledge?"

"Ambaṭṭha, it's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own
insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child,
or someone reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One
and reflect
...[343](#endnotes.xhtml_note-343){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-343
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption ... This
pertains to their conduct.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
This pertains to their conduct.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in
the third absorption ... This pertains to their conduct.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption ... This
pertains to their conduct. This is that conduct.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge and
vision. This pertains to their knowledge. ... They understand: 'There is
nothing further for this place.' This pertains to their knowledge. This
is that knowledge.

This mendicant is said to be 'accomplished in knowledge', and also
'accomplished in conduct', and also 'accomplished in knowledge and
conduct'. And, Ambaṭṭha, there is no accomplishment in knowledge and
conduct that is better or finer than this.

### 5. Four Causes of Quitting {.subheading}

There are these four causes of quitting this supreme knowledge and
conduct.[344](#endnotes.xhtml_note-344){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-344
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? Firstly, take some ascetic or
brahmin who, not managing to obtain this supreme knowledge and conduct,
plunges into a wilderness region carrying their stuff with a
shoulder-pole, thinking they will get by eating fallen
fruit.[345](#endnotes.xhtml_note-345){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-345
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In fact they succeed only in serving
someone accomplished in knowledge and
conduct.[346](#endnotes.xhtml_note-346){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-346
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first cause of quitting this
supreme knowledge and conduct.

Furthermore, take some ascetic or brahmin who, not managing to obtain
this supreme knowledge and conduct or to get by eating fallen fruit,
plunges into a wilderness region carrying a spade and basket, thinking
they will get by eating tubers and
fruit.[347](#endnotes.xhtml_note-347){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-347
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In fact they succeed only in serving
someone accomplished in knowledge and conduct. This is the second cause
of quitting this supreme knowledge and conduct.

Furthermore, take some ascetic or brahmin who, not managing to obtain
this supreme knowledge and conduct, or to get by eating fallen fruit, or
to get by eating tubers and fruit, sets up a fire chamber in the
neighborhood of a village or town and dwells there serving the sacred
flame. In fact they succeed only in serving someone accomplished in
knowledge and conduct. This is the third cause of quitting this supreme
knowledge and conduct.

Furthermore, take some ascetic or brahmin who, not managing to obtain
this supreme knowledge and conduct, or to get by eating fallen fruit, or
to get by eating tubers and fruit, or to serve the sacred flame, sets up
a four-doored fire chamber at the crossroads and dwells there, thinking:
'When an ascetic or brahmin comes from the four quarters, I will honor
them as best I can.' In fact they succeed only in serving someone
accomplished in knowledge and conduct. This is the fourth cause of
quitting this supreme knowledge and conduct. These are the four causes
of quitting this supreme knowledge and conduct.

What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Is this supreme knowledge and conduct seen
in your own
tradition?"[348](#endnotes.xhtml_note-348){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-348
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama. Who am I and my tradition compared with the supreme
knowledge and conduct? We are far from that."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Since you're not managing to obtain this
supreme knowledge and conduct, have you with your tradition plunged into
a wilderness region carrying your stuff with a shoulder-pole, thinking
you will get by eating fallen fruit?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Have you with your tradition ... plunged
into a wilderness region carrying a spade and basket, thinking you will
get by eating tubers and fruit?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Have you with your tradition ... set up a
fire chamber in the neighborhood of a village or town and dwelt there
serving the sacred flame?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Have you with your tradition ... set up a
four-doored fire chamber at the crossroads and dwelt there, thinking:
'When an ascetic or brahmin comes from the four quarters, I will honor
them as best I can'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So you with your tradition are not only inferior to the supreme
knowledge and conduct, you are even inferior to the four causes of
quitting the supreme knowledge and conduct. But you have been told this
by your tutor, the brahmin Pokkharasāti: 'Who are these shavelings, fake
ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our kinsman compared
with conversation with the brahmins of the three knowledges?" Yet he
himself has not even fulfilled one of the quittings! See, Ambaṭṭha, how
your tutor Pokkharasāti has wronged you.

### 6. Being Like the Sages of the Past {.subheading}

Pokkharasāti lives off an endowment provided by King Pasenadi of Kosala.
But the king won't even grant him an audience face to face. When he
consults, he does so behind a
curtain.[349](#endnotes.xhtml_note-349){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-349
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why wouldn't the king grant a face to face
audience with someone who'd receive his legitimate presentation of food?
See, Ambaṭṭha, how your tutor Pokkharasāti has wronged you.

What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? Suppose King Pasenadi was holding
consultations with warrior-chiefs or chieftains while sitting on an
elephant's neck or on horseback, or while standing on the mat in a
chariot.[350](#endnotes.xhtml_note-350){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-350
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And suppose he'd get down from that place
and stand aside. Then along would come a worker or their bondservant,
who'd stand in the same place and continue the consultation: 'This is
what King Pasenadi says, and this too is what the king says.' Though he
spoke the king's words and gave the king's
advice,[351](#endnotes.xhtml_note-351){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-351
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} does that qualify him to be the king or the
king's minister?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, Ambaṭṭha, the ancient seers of the brahmins were
Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja,
Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. They were the authors and propagators of
the hymns. Their hymnal was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient
times; and these days, brahmins continue to sing and chant it, chanting
what was chanted and teaching what was
taught.[352](#endnotes.xhtml_note-352){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-352
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You might imagine that, since you've
learned their hymns by heart in your own tradition, that makes you a
seer or someone on the path to becoming a seer. But that is not
possible.

What do you think, Ambaṭṭha? According to what you have heard from
elderly and senior brahmins, the tutors of tutors, did those ancient
brahmin seers---nicely bathed and anointed, with hair and beard dressed,
bedecked with jewels, earrings, and bracelets, dressed in white---amuse
themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation, like you do today in your tradition?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Did they eat boiled fine rice, garnished with clean meat, with the dark
grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces, like you do today
in your tradition?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Did they amuse themselves with girls wearing thongs that show off their
curves, like you do today in your
tradition?"[353](#endnotes.xhtml_note-353){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-353
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Did they drive about in chariots drawn by mares with plaited manes,
whipping and lashing them onward with long goads, like you do today in
your
tradition?"[354](#endnotes.xhtml_note-354){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-354
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Did they get men with long swords to guard them in fortresses with
moats dug and barriers in place, like you do today in your
tradition?"[355](#endnotes.xhtml_note-355){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-355
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So, Ambaṭṭha, in your own tradition you are neither seer nor someone on
the path to becoming a seer. Whoever has any doubt or uncertainty about
me, let them ask me and I will clear up their doubts with my
answer."[356](#endnotes.xhtml_note-356){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-356
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 7. Seeing the Two Marks {.subheading}

Then the Buddha came out of his dwelling and proceeded to begin walking
mindfully,[357](#endnotes.xhtml_note-357){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-357
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and Ambaṭṭha did likewise. Then while
walking beside the Buddha, Ambaṭṭha scrutinized his body for the
thirty-two marks of a great
man.[358](#endnotes.xhtml_note-358){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-358
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw all of them except for two, which he
had doubts about: whether the private parts are covered in a foreskin,
and the largeness of the tongue.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "This student Ambaṭṭha sees all the
marks except for two, which he has doubts about: whether the private
parts are covered in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue." Then
the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Ambaṭṭha would see his
private parts covered in a
foreskin.[359](#endnotes.xhtml_note-359){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-359
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And he stuck out his tongue and stroked
back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire
forehead with his tongue.

Then Ambaṭṭha thought, "The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two
marks completely, lacking none."

He said to the Buddha, "Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties,
and much to do."

"Please, Ambaṭṭha, go at your convenience." Then Ambaṭṭha mounted his
chariot drawn by mares and left.

Now at that time the brahmin Pokkharasāti had come out from Ukkaṭṭhā
together with a large group of brahmins and was sitting in his own park
just waiting for Ambaṭṭha. Then Ambaṭṭha entered the park. He went by
carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached
the brahmin Pokkharasāti on foot. He bowed and sat down to one side, and
Pokkharasāti said to him:

"I hope, dear Ambaṭṭha, you saw Mister Gotama?"

"I saw him, sir."

"Well, does he live up to his reputation or not?"

"He does, sir. Mister Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks completely,
lacking none."

"And did you have some discussion with him?"

"I did."

"And what kind of discussion did you have with him?" Then Ambaṭṭha
informed Pokkharasāti of all they had discussed.

Then Pokkharasāti said to Ambaṭṭha, "Oh, our bloody fake scholar, our
fake learned man, who pretends to be proficient in the three Vedas! A
man who behaves like this ought, when their body breaks up, after death,
to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.[360](#endnotes.xhtml_note-360){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-360
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's only because you repeatedly attacked
Mister Gotama like that that he kept bringing up charges against
us!"[361](#endnotes.xhtml_note-361){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-361
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Angry and upset, he kicked Ambaṭṭha
over,[362](#endnotes.xhtml_note-362){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-362
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and wanted to go and see the Buddha right
away.

### 8. Pokkharasāti Visits the Buddha {.subheading}

Then those brahmins said to Pokkharasāti, "It's much too late to visit
the ascetic Gotama today. You can visit him
tomorrow."[363](#endnotes.xhtml_note-363){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-363
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So Pokkharasāti had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own
home. Then he mounted a carriage and, with attendants carrying torches,
set out from Ukkaṭṭhā for the forest near
Icchānaṅgala.[364](#endnotes.xhtml_note-364){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-364
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot. He went up to
the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the
Buddha, "Master Gotama, has my resident pupil, the student Ambaṭṭha,
come here?"

"Yes he has, brahmin."

"And did you have some discussion with him?"

"I did."

"And what kind of discussion did you have with
him?"[365](#endnotes.xhtml_note-365){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-365
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha informed Pokkharasāti of
all they had discussed.

Then Pokkharasāti said to the Buddha, "Ambaṭṭha is a fool, Mister
Gotama. Please forgive
him."[366](#endnotes.xhtml_note-366){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-366
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"May the student Ambaṭṭha be happy,
brahmin."[367](#endnotes.xhtml_note-367){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-367
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Pokkharasāti scrutinized the Buddha's body for the thirty-two marks
of a great man. He saw all of them except for two, which he had doubts
about: whether the private parts are covered in a foreskin, and the
largeness of the tongue.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "Pokkharasāti sees all the marks except
for two, which he has doubts about: whether the private parts are
covered in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue." Then the Buddha
used his psychic power to will that Pokkharasāti would see his private
parts covered in a foreskin. And he stuck out his tongue and stroked
back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire
forehead with his tongue.

Pokkharasāti thought, "The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks
completely, lacking none."

He said to the Buddha, "Would Mister Gotama together with the mendicant
Saṅgha please accept today's meal from me?" The Buddha consented with
silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Pokkharasāti announced the
time to him, "It's time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready." Then the
Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to
the home of Pokkharasāti together with the mendicant Saṅgha, where he
sat on the seat spread
out.[368](#endnotes.xhtml_note-368){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-368
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Pokkharasāti served and satisfied the
Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods, while
his young students served the Saṅgha. When the Buddha had eaten and
washed his hand and bowl, Pokkharasāti took a low seat and sat to one
side.

Then the Buddha taught him step by step, with a talk on giving, ethical
conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so
sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of
renunciation.[369](#endnotes.xhtml_note-369){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-369
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when the Buddha knew that
Pokkharasāti's mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and
confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas: suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the
path.[370](#endnotes.xhtml_note-370){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-370
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would
properly absorb dye, in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision
of the Dhamma arose in the brahmin
Pokkharasāti:[371](#endnotes.xhtml_note-371){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-371
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Everything that has a beginning has an
end."[372](#endnotes.xhtml_note-372){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-372
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 9. Pokkharasāti Declares Himself a Lay Follower {.subheading}

Then Pokkharasāti saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He
went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. He said to
the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting
the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, just so has Mister Gotama made the Teaching clear in many
ways. Together with my children, wives, retinue, and ministers, I go for
refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.
From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life.

Just as Mister Gotama visits other devoted families in Ukkaṭṭhā, may he
visit
mine.[373](#endnotes.xhtml_note-373){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-373
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The brahmin boys and girls there will bow
to you, rise in your presence, give you a seat and water, and gain
confidence in their hearts. That will be for their lasting welfare and
happiness."[374](#endnotes.xhtml_note-374){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-374
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That's nice of you to say,
householder."[375](#endnotes.xhtml_note-375){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-375
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="dn4">

## [DN 4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Soṇadaṇḍa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soṇadaṇḍasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. The Brahmins and Householders of Campā {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[376](#endnotes.xhtml_note-376){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-376
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Aṅgas together with a large Saṅgha of five
hundred mendicants when he arrived at
Campā,[377](#endnotes.xhtml_note-377){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-377
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} where he stayed by the banks of the Gaggarā
Lotus
Pond.[378](#endnotes.xhtml_note-378){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-378
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Soṇadaṇḍa was living in Campā. It was a
crown property given by King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha, teeming with
living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park
endowed to a
brahmin.[379](#endnotes.xhtml_note-379){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-379
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Campā
heard:[380](#endnotes.xhtml_note-380){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-380
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Campā and is staying on the banks of the Gaggarā
Lotus Pond. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own
insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones." Then, having departed
Campā, they formed into companies and headed to the Gaggarā Lotus Pond.

Now at that time the brahmin Soṇadaṇḍa had retired to the upper floor of
his stilt longhouse for his midday nap. He saw the brahmins and
householders heading for the lotus pond, and addressed his butler, "My
butler, why are the brahmins and householders headed for the Gaggarā
Lotus Pond?"

"The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Campā and is staying on the banks of
the Gaggarā Lotus Pond. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They're going to
see that Mister Gotama."

"Well then, go to the brahmins and householders and say to them: 'Sirs,
the brahmin Soṇadaṇḍa asks you to wait, as he will also go to see the
ascetic Gotama.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

### 2. The Qualities of Soṇadaṇḍa {.subheading}

Now at that time around five hundred brahmins from abroad were residing
in Campā on some business. They heard that the brahmin Soṇadaṇḍa was
going to see the ascetic Gotama. They approached Soṇadaṇḍa and said to
him, "Is it really true that you are going to see the ascetic Gotama?"

"Yes, gentlemen, it is true."

"Please don't, mister Soṇadaṇḍa! It's not appropriate for you to go to
see the ascetic
Gotama.[381](#endnotes.xhtml_note-381){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-381
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For if you do so, your reputation will
diminish and his will increase. For this reason it's not appropriate for
you to go to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to
see you.

You are well born on both your mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal
generation.[382](#endnotes.xhtml_note-382){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-382
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this reason it's not appropriate for
you to go to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to
see you.

You're rich, affluent, and wealthy. ...

You recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered the three Vedas,
together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology
and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. You know them
word-by-word, and their grammar. You are well versed in cosmology and
the marks of a great man. ...

You are attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. You are
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold.
...[383](#endnotes.xhtml_note-383){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-383
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

You are ethical, mature in ethical conduct. ...

You're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

You tutor the tutors of many, and teach three hundred young students to
recite the hymns. Many students come from various districts and
countries for the sake of the hymns, wishing to learn the hymns.
...[384](#endnotes.xhtml_note-384){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-384
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

You're old, elderly and senior, advanced in years, and have reached the
final stage of life. The ascetic Gotama is young, and has newly gone
forth. ...

You're honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King
Bimbisāra of Magadha ...

and the brahmin Pokkharasāti. ...

You live in Campā, a crown property given by King Seniya Bimbisāra of
Magadha, teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and
grain, a royal park endowed to a brahmin. For this reason, too, it's not
appropriate for you to go to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate
that he comes to see you."

### 3. The Qualities of the Buddha {.subheading}

When they had spoken, Soṇadaṇḍa said to those brahmins:

"Well then, gentlemen, listen to why it's appropriate for me to go to
see the ascetic Gotama, and it's not appropriate for him to come to see
me. He is well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. For this reason it's not appropriate for the
ascetic Gotama to come to see me; rather, it's appropriate for me to go
to see him.

When he went forth he abandoned a large family circle. ...

When he went forth he abandoned abundant gold, both coined and uncoined,
stored in dungeons and towers. ...

He went forth from the lay life to homelessness while still a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life. ...

Though his mother and father wished otherwise, weeping with tearful
faces, he shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and
went forth from the lay life to homelessness.
...[385](#endnotes.xhtml_note-385){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-385
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He is
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold. ...

He is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is noble and skillful.
...

He's a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

He's a tutor of tutors. ...

He has ended sensual desire, and is rid of caprice. ...

He teaches the efficacy of deeds and action. He doesn't wish any harm
upon the community of brahmins.
...[386](#endnotes.xhtml_note-386){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-386
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He went forth from an eminent family of unbroken aristocratic lineage.
...

He went forth from a rich, affluent, and wealthy family. ...

People come from distant lands and distant countries to question him.
...

Many thousands of deities have gone for refuge for life to him. ...

He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' ...

He has the thirty-two marks of a great man. ...

He is welcoming, congenial, polite, smiling, open, the first to speak.
...[387](#endnotes.xhtml_note-387){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-387
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He's honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by the four
assemblies.
...[388](#endnotes.xhtml_note-388){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-388
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Many gods and humans are devoted to him. ...

While he is residing in a village or town, non-human entities do not
harass them. ...

He leads an order and a community, and tutors a community, and is said
to be the best of the various religious founders. He didn't come by his
fame in the same ways as those other ascetics and
brahmins.[389](#endnotes.xhtml_note-389){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-389
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, he came by his fame due to his
supreme knowledge and conduct. ...

King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha and his wives and children have gone
for refuge for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[390](#endnotes.xhtml_note-390){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-390
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

King Pasenadi of Kosala and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[391](#endnotes.xhtml_note-391){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-391
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmin Pokkharasāti and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[392](#endnotes.xhtml_note-392){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-392
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He's honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King
Bimbisāra of Magadha ...

King Pasenadi of Kosala ...

and the brahmin Pokkharasāti.

The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Campā and is staying at the Gaggarā
Lotus Pond. Any ascetic or brahmin who comes to stay in our village
district is our guest, and should be honored and respected as such. For
this reason, too, it's not appropriate for Mister Gotama to come to see
me; rather, it's appropriate for me to go to see him. This is the extent
of Mister Gotama's praise that I have memorized. But his praises are not
confined to this, for the praise of Mister Gotama is limitless."

When he had spoken, those brahmins said to him, "According to
Soṇadaṇḍa's praises, if Mister Gotama were staying within a hundred
leagues, it'd be worthwhile for a faithful gentleman to go to see him,
even if he had to carry his own provisions in a
knapsack."[393](#endnotes.xhtml_note-393){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-393
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, gentlemen, let's all go to see the ascetic Gotama."

### 4. Soṇadaṇḍa Has Second Thoughts {.subheading}

Then Soṇadaṇḍa together with a large group of brahmins went to see the
Buddha.

But as he reached the far side of the forest, this thought came to mind,
"Suppose I was to ask the ascetic Gotama a question. He might say to me:
'Brahmin, you shouldn't ask your question like that. This is how you
should ask it.' And the assembly might disparage me for that: 'Soṇadaṇḍa
is foolish and incompetent. He's not able to ask the ascetic Gotama a
rational
question.'[394](#endnotes.xhtml_note-394){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-394
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when you're disparaged by the assembly,
your reputation diminishes. When your reputation diminishes, your wealth
also diminishes. But my wealth relies on my reputation.

Or if the ascetic Gotama asks me a question, I might not satisfy him
with my answer. He might say to me: 'Brahmin, you shouldn't answer the
question like that. This is how you should answer it.' And the assembly
might disparage me for that: 'Soṇadaṇḍa is foolish and incompetent. He's
not able to satisfy the ascetic Gotama's mind with his answer.' And when
you're disparaged by the assembly, your reputation diminishes. When your
reputation diminishes, your wealth also diminishes. But my wealth relies
on my reputation.

On the other hand, if I were to turn back after having come so far
without having seen the ascetic Gotama, the assembly might disparage me
for that: 'Soṇadaṇḍa is foolish and incompetent. He's stuck-up and
scared. He doesn't dare to go and see the ascetic Gotama. For how on
earth can he turn back after having come so far without having seen the
ascetic Gotama!' And when you're disparaged by the assembly, your
reputation diminishes. When your reputation diminishes, your wealth also
diminishes. But my wealth relies on my reputation."

Then Soṇadaṇḍa went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with
him.[395](#endnotes.xhtml_note-395){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-395
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side. Before sitting down to one side,
some of the brahmins and householders of Campā bowed, some exchanged
greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms
toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept
silent.

But while sitting there, Soṇadaṇḍa continued to be plagued by many
second thoughts. He thought, "If only the ascetic Gotama would ask me
about my own tutor's scriptural heritage of the three Vedas! Then I
could definitely satisfy his mind with my answer."

### 5. What Makes a Brahmin {.subheading}

Then the Buddha, knowing Soṇadaṇḍa's train of thought, thought, "This
brahmin Soṇadaṇḍa is troubled by his own thoughts. Why don't I ask him
about his own tutor's scriptural heritage of the three
Vedas?"[396](#endnotes.xhtml_note-396){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-396
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So he said to Soṇadaṇḍa, "Brahmin, how many factors must a brahmin
possess for the brahmins to describe him as a brahmin; and so that when
he says 'I am a brahmin' he speaks rightly, without falling into
falsehood?"

Then Soṇadaṇḍa thought, "The ascetic Gotama has asked me about exactly
what I wanted, what I wished for, what I desired, what I yearned for;
that is, my own scriptural heritage. I can definitely satisfy his mind
with my answer."

Then Soṇadaṇḍa straightened his back, looked around the assembly, and
said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, a brahmin must possess five factors
for the brahmins to describe him as a brahmin; and so that when he says
'I am a brahmin' he speaks rightly, without falling into falsehood. What
five? It's when a brahmin is well born on both his mother's and father's
side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to
the seventh paternal generation. He recites and remembers the hymns, and
has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and
ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the
testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word, and their grammar. He
is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. He is
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He is
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold. He is
ethical, mature in ethical conduct. He's astute and clever, being the
first or second to hold the sacrificial
ladle.[397](#endnotes.xhtml_note-397){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-397
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the five factors which a brahmin
must possess for the brahmins to describe him as a brahmin; and so that
when he says 'I am a brahmin' he speaks rightly, without falling into
falsehood."

"But brahmin, is it possible to set aside one of these five factors and
still rightly describe someone as a
brahmin?"[398](#endnotes.xhtml_note-398){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-398
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It is possible, Mister Gotama. We could leave appearance out of the
five factors. For what does appearance matter? A brahmin must possess
the remaining four factors for the brahmins to rightly describe him as a
brahmin."

"But brahmin, is it possible to set aside one of these four factors and
still rightly describe someone as a brahmin?"

"It is possible, Mister Gotama. We could leave the hymns out of the four
factors. For what do the hymns matter? A brahmin must possess the
remaining three factors for the brahmins to rightly describe him as a
brahmin."

"But brahmin, is it possible to set aside one of these three factors and
still rightly describe someone as a brahmin?"

"It is possible, Mister Gotama. We could leave birth out of the three
factors. For what does birth matter? It's when a brahmin is ethical,
mature in ethical conduct; and he's astute and clever, being the first
or second to hold the sacrificial ladle. A brahmin must possess these
two factors for the brahmins to rightly describe him as a brahmin."

When he had spoken, those brahmins said to him, "Please don't say that,
mister Soṇadaṇḍa, please don't say that! You're just condemning
appearance, the hymns, and birth! You're totally going over to the
ascetic Gotama's doctrine!"

So the Buddha said to them, "Well, brahmins, if you think that Soṇadaṇḍa
is unlearned, a poor speaker, witless, and not capable of debating with
me about this, then leave him aside and you can debate with me. But if
you think that he's learned, a good speaker, astute, and capable of
debating with me about this, then you should stand aside and let him
debate with me."

When he said this, Soṇadaṇḍa said to the Buddha, "Let it be, Mister
Gotama, be silent. I myself will respond to them in a legitimate
manner." Then he said to those brahmins, "Don't say this, good sirs,
don't say this: 'You're just condemning appearance, the hymns, and
birth! You're totally going over to the ascetic Gotama's doctrine!' I'm
not condemning appearance, hymns, or birth."

Now at that time Soṇadaṇḍa's nephew, the young student Aṅgaka was
sitting in that assembly. Then Soṇadaṇḍa said to those brahmins,
"Gentlemen, do you see my nephew, the young student Aṅgaka?"

"Yes, sir."

"Aṅgaka is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He is
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold. There's
no-one in this assembly so good-looking, apart from the ascetic Gotama.
Aṅgaka recites and remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three
Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their
phonology and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows
them word-by-word, and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and
the marks of a great man. And I am the one who teaches him the hymns.
Aṅgaka is well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. And I know his mother and father. But if Aṅgaka
were to kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, and drink
liquor, then what's the use of his appearance, his hymns, or his birth?
It's when a brahmin is ethical, mature in ethical conduct; and he's
astute and clever, being the first or second to hold the sacrificial
ladle. A brahmin must possess these two factors for the brahmins to
rightly describe him as a brahmin."

### 6. The Discussion of Ethics and Wisdom {.subheading}

"But brahmin, is it possible to set aside one of these two factors and
still rightly describe someone as a brahmin?"

"No, Mister Gotama. For wisdom is cleansed by ethics, and ethics are
cleansed by wisdom. Ethics and wisdom always go together. An ethical
person is wise, and a wise person ethical. And ethics and wisdom are
said to be the best things in the world. It's just like when you clean
one hand with the other, or clean one foot with the other. In the same
way, wisdom is cleansed by ethics, and ethics are cleansed by wisdom.
Ethics and wisdom always go together. An ethical person is wise, and a
wise person ethical. And ethics and wisdom are said to be the best
things in the world."

"That's so true, brahmin, that's so true! For wisdom is cleansed by
ethics, and ethics are cleansed by
wisdom.[399](#endnotes.xhtml_note-399){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-399
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ethics and wisdom always go together. An
ethical person is wise, and a wise person ethical. And ethics and wisdom
are said to be the best things in the world. It's just like when you
clean one hand with the other, or clean one foot with the other. In the
same way, wisdom is cleansed by ethics, and ethics are cleansed by
wisdom. Ethics and wisdom always go together. An ethical person is wise,
and a wise person ethical. And ethics and wisdom are said to be the best
things in the world.

But what, brahmin, is that ethical
conduct?[400](#endnotes.xhtml_note-400){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-400
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is that wisdom?"

"That's all I know about this matter, Mister Gotama. May Mister Gotama
himself please clarify the meaning of this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Soṇadaṇḍa replied. The Buddha said this:

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
This, brahmin, is that ethical conduct. ... They enter and remain in the
first absorption
...[401](#endnotes.xhtml_note-401){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-401
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption ... They project and extend the mind toward knowledge
and vision ... This pertains to their wisdom. ... They understand: '...
there is nothing further for this place.' This pertains to their wisdom.
This, brahmin, is that wisdom."

### 7. Soṇadaṇḍa Declares Himself a Lay Follower {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Soṇadaṇḍa said to the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister
Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing
the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in
the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama
has made the Teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister
Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life. Would you and the mendicant Saṅgha please accept a meal
from me tomorrow?" The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Soṇadaṇḍa got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving. And when the night had passed Soṇadaṇḍa had
delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home. Then he had
the Buddha informed of the time, saying, "It's time, Mister Gotama, the
meal is ready." Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his
bowl and robe, went to the home of Soṇadaṇḍa together with the mendicant
Saṅgha, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then Soṇadaṇḍa served and
satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands
with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Soṇadaṇḍa took a
low seat and sat to one side. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha:
"Mister Gotama, if, when I have gone to an assembly, I rise from my seat
and bow to the Buddha, that assembly might disparage me for that. And
when you're disparaged by the assembly, your reputation diminishes. When
your reputation diminishes, your wealth also diminishes. But my wealth
relies on my reputation. If, when I have gone to an assembly, I raise my
joined palms, please take it that I have risen from my seat. And if I
undo my turban, please take it that I have bowed. And Mister Gotama, if,
when I am in a carriage, I get down from my carriage and bow to the
Buddha, that assembly might disparage me for that. If, when I am in a
carriage, I hold up my goad, please take it that I have got down from my
carriage. And if I lower my sunshade, please take it that I have
bowed."[402](#endnotes.xhtml_note-402){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-402
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the brahmin
Soṇadaṇḍa with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and
left.

</article>
<article id="dn5">

## [DN 5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kūṭadanta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kūṭadantasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. The Brahmins and Householders of Khāṇumata {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[403](#endnotes.xhtml_note-403){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-403
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Magadhans together with a large Saṅgha of
five hundred mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Magadhan
brahmins named
Khāṇumata.[404](#endnotes.xhtml_note-404){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-404
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There he stayed nearby at
Ambalaṭṭhikā.[405](#endnotes.xhtml_note-405){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-405
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Kūṭadanta was living in Khāṇumata. It was a
crown property given by King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha, teeming with
living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park
endowed to a
brahmin.[406](#endnotes.xhtml_note-406){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-406
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now at that time Kūṭadanta had prepared a
great sacrifice. Bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats and rams---seven
hundred of each---had been led to the post for the
sacrifice.[407](#endnotes.xhtml_note-407){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-407
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Khāṇumata heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Khāṇumata and is staying at Ambalaṭṭhikā. He has
this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the
world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and
humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to
see such perfected ones."

Then, having departed Khāṇumata, they formed into companies and headed
to Ambalaṭṭhikā.

Now at that time the brahmin Kūṭadanta had retired to the upper floor of
his stilt longhouse for his midday nap. He saw the brahmins and
householders heading for Ambalaṭṭhikā, and addressed his butler, "My
butler, why are the brahmins and householders headed for Ambalaṭṭhikā?"

"The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Khāṇumata and is staying at
Ambalaṭṭhikā. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They're going to
see that Mister Gotama."

Then Kūṭadanta thought, "I've heard that the ascetic Gotama knows how to
accomplish the sacrifice with three modes and sixteen
accessories.[408](#endnotes.xhtml_note-408){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-408
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't know about that, but I wish to
perform a great sacrifice. Why don't I ask him how to accomplish the
sacrifice with three modes and sixteen
accessories?"[409](#endnotes.xhtml_note-409){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-409
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Kūṭadanta addressed his butler, "Well then, go to the brahmins and
householders and say to them: 'Sirs, the brahmin Kūṭadanta asks you to
wait, as he will also go to see the ascetic Gotama.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

### 2. The Qualities of Kūṭadanta {.subheading}

Now at that time several hundred brahmins were residing in Khāṇumata
thinking to participate in Kūṭadanta's sacrifice. They heard that
Kūṭadanta was going to see the ascetic Gotama. They approached Kūṭadanta
and said to him:

"Is it really true that you are going to see the ascetic Gotama?"

"Yes, gentlemen, it is true."

"Please don't! It's not appropriate for you to go to see the ascetic
Gotama. For if you do so, your reputation will diminish and his will
increase. For this reason it's not appropriate for you to go to see the
ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to see you.

You are well born on both your mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. For this reason it's not appropriate for you to go
to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to see you.

You're rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of property and assets,
and lots of money and grain ...

You recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered the three Vedas,
together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology
and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. You know them
word-by-word, and their grammar. You are well versed in cosmology and
the marks of a great man. ...

You are attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. You are
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold. ...

You are ethical, mature in ethical conduct. ...

You're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

You teach the tutors of many, and teach three hundred young students to
recite the hymns. Many students come from various districts and
countries for the sake of the hymns, wishing to learn the hymns. ...

You're old, elderly and senior, advanced in years, and have reached the
final stage of life. The ascetic Gotama is young, and has newly gone
forth. ...

You're honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King
Bimbisāra of Magadha ...

and the brahmin Pokkharasāti. ...

You live in Khāṇumata, a crown property given by King Seniya Bimbisāra
of Magadha, teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and
grain, a royal park endowed to a brahmin. For this reason it's not
appropriate for you to go to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate
that he comes to see you."

### 3. The Qualities of the Buddha {.subheading}

When they had spoken, Kūṭadanta said to those brahmins:

"Well then, gentlemen, listen to why it's appropriate for me to go to
see the ascetic Gotama, and it's not appropriate for him to come to see
me. He is well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. For this reason it's not appropriate for the
ascetic Gotama to come to see me; rather, it's appropriate for me to go
to see him.

When he went forth he abandoned a large family circle. ...

When he went forth he abandoned abundant gold, both coined and uncoined,
stored in dungeons and towers. ...

He went forth from the lay life to homelessness while still a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life. ...

Though his mother and father wished otherwise, weeping with tearful
faces, he shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and
went forth from the lay life to homelessness. ...

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He is
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold. ...

He is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is noble and skillful.
...

He's a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

He's a tutor of tutors. ...

He has ended sensual desire, and is rid of caprice. ...

He teaches the efficacy of deeds and action. He doesn't wish any harm
upon the community of brahmins. ...

He went forth from an eminent family of unbroken aristocratic lineage.
...

He went forth from a rich, affluent, and wealthy family. ...

People come from distant lands and distant countries to question him.
...

Many thousands of deities have gone for refuge for life to him. ...

He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' ...

He has the thirty-two marks of a great man. ...

He is welcoming, congenial, polite, smiling, open, the first to speak.
...

He's honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by the four
assemblies. ...

Many gods and humans are devoted to him. ...

While he is residing in a village or town, non-human entities do not
harass them. ...

He leads an order and a community, and tutors a community, and is said
to be the best of the various religious founders. He didn't come by his
fame in the same ways as those other ascetics and brahmins. Rather, he
came by his fame due to his supreme knowledge and conduct. ...

King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha and his wives and children have gone
for refuge for life to the ascetic Gotama. ...

King Pasenadi of Kosala and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama. ...

The brahmin Pokkharasāti and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama. ...

He's honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King
Bimbisāra of Magadha ...

King Pasenadi of Kosala ...

and the brahmin Pokkharasāti.

The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Khāṇumata and is staying at
Ambalaṭṭhikā. Any ascetic or brahmin who comes to stay in our village
district is our guest, and should be honored and respected as such. For
this reason, too, it's not appropriate for Mister Gotama to come to see
me, rather, it's appropriate for me to go to see him. This is the extent
of Mister Gotama's praise that I have memorized. But his praises are not
confined to this, for the praise of Mister Gotama is limitless."

When he had spoken, those brahmins said to him, "According to
Kūṭadanta's praises, if Mister Gotama were staying within a hundred
leagues, it'd be worthwhile for a faithful gentleman to go to see him,
even if he had to carry his own provisions in a knapsack."

"Well then, gentlemen, let's all go to see the ascetic Gotama."

### 4. The Story of King Mahāvijita's Sacrifice {.subheading}

Then Kūṭadanta together with a large group of brahmins went to see the
Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side. Before sitting down to
one side, some of the brahmins and householders of Khāṇumata bowed, some
exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined
palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some
kept silent.

Kūṭadanta said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, I've heard that you know
how to accomplish the sacrifice with three modes and sixteen
accessories. I don't know about that, but I wish to perform a great
sacrifice. Please teach me how to accomplish the sacrifice with three
modes and sixteen accessories."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."[410](#endnotes.xhtml_note-410){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-410
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes sir," Kūṭadanta replied. The Buddha said this: "Once upon a time,
brahmin, there was a king named Mahāvijita. He was rich, affluent, and
wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, lots
of money and grain, and a full treasury and
storehouses.[411](#endnotes.xhtml_note-411){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-411
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then as King Mahāvijita was in private
retreat this thought came to his
mind:[412](#endnotes.xhtml_note-412){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-412
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I have achieved human wealth, and reign
after conquering this vast territory. Why don't I hold a large
sacrifice? That will be for my lasting welfare and
happiness.'[413](#endnotes.xhtml_note-413){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-413
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then he summoned the brahmin high priest and said to
him:[414](#endnotes.xhtml_note-414){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-414
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Just now, brahmin, as I was in private
retreat this thought came to mind, "I have achieved human wealth, and
reign after conquering this vast territory. Why don't I perform a great
sacrifice? That will be for my lasting welfare and happiness." Brahmin,
I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please instruct me. It will be for
my lasting welfare and happiness.'

When he had spoken, the brahmin high priest said to him: 'Sir, the
king's realm is harried and oppressed. Raiding of villages, towns, and
cities has been seen, and infesting of
highways.[415](#endnotes.xhtml_note-415){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-415
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if the king were to extract more taxes
while his realm is thus harried and oppressed, he would not be doing his
duty.[416](#endnotes.xhtml_note-416){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-416
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now the king might think, "I'll eradicate this plague of savages by
execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or
banishment!" But that's not the right way to eradicate this plague of
savages.[417](#endnotes.xhtml_note-417){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-417
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Those who remain after the killing will
return to harass the king's
realm.[418](#endnotes.xhtml_note-418){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-418
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Rather, here is a plan, relying on which the plague of savages will be
properly
uprooted.[419](#endnotes.xhtml_note-419){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-419
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So let the king provide seed and fodder for
those in the realm who work in growing crops and raising
cattle.[420](#endnotes.xhtml_note-420){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-420
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let the king provide funding for those who
work in trade. Let the king guarantee food and wages for those in
government service. Then the people, occupied with their own work, will
not harass the
realm.[421](#endnotes.xhtml_note-421){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-421
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The king's revenues will be
great.[422](#endnotes.xhtml_note-422){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-422
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the country is secured as a sanctuary,
free of being harried and oppressed, the happy people, with joy in their
hearts, dancing with children at their breast, will dwell as if their
houses were wide
open.'[423](#endnotes.xhtml_note-423){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-423
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The king agreed with the high priest's advice and followed his
recommendation.[424](#endnotes.xhtml_note-424){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-424
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the king summoned the brahmin high priest and said to him: 'I have
eradicated the plague of savages. And relying on your plan my revenue is
now great. Since the country is secured as a sanctuary, free of being
harried and oppressed, the happy people, with joy in their hearts,
dancing with children at their breast, dwell as if their houses were
wide open. Brahmin, I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please instruct
me. It will be for my lasting welfare and happiness.'

#### 4.1. The Four Accessories {.subheading}

'In that case, let the king announce this throughout the realm to the
aristocrat vassals of both town and country; the ministers and
councillors of both town and country; the well-to-do brahmins of both
town and country; and the well-off householders of both town and
country.[425](#endnotes.xhtml_note-425){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-425
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "I wish to perform a great sacrifice.
Please grant your approval, good sirs; it will be for my lasting welfare
and happiness."

The king agreed with the high priest's advice and followed his
recommendation. And all of the people who were thus informed responded
by saying: 'May the king perform a sacrifice! It is time for a
sacrifice, great king.' And so these four consenting factions became
accessories to the
sacrifice.[426](#endnotes.xhtml_note-426){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-426
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 4.2. The Eight Accessories {.subheading}

King Mahāvijita possessed eight
factors.[427](#endnotes.xhtml_note-427){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-427
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He was well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation.

He was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He was
magnificent and splendid as the Divinity, remarkable to behold.

He was rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots
of property and assets, lots of money and grain, and a full treasury and
storehouses.

He was powerful, having an army of four divisions that was obedient and
carried out instructions. He'd probably prevail over his enemies just
with his
reputation.[428](#endnotes.xhtml_note-428){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-428
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He was faithful, generous, a donor, his door always open. He was a
well-spring of support, making merit with ascetics and brahmins, for
paupers, vagrants, supplicants, and beggars.

He was very learned in diverse fields of learning. He understood the
meaning of diverse statements,
saying:[429](#endnotes.xhtml_note-429){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-429
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is what that statement means; that is
what this statement means.'

He was astute, competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through
as they bear upon the past, future, and
present.[430](#endnotes.xhtml_note-430){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-430
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the eight factors that King Mahāvijita possessed. And so these
eight factors also became accessories to the sacrifice.

#### 4.3. Four More Accessories {.subheading}

And the brahmin high priest had four
factors.[431](#endnotes.xhtml_note-431){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-431
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He was well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation.

He recited and remembered the hymns, and had mastered the three Vedas,
together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology
and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knew them
word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well versed in cosmology and the
marks of a great man.

He was ethical, mature in ethical conduct.

He was astute and clever, being the first or second to hold the
sacrificial ladle.

These are the four factors that the brahmin high priest possessed. And
so these four factors also became accessories to the sacrifice.

#### 4.4. The Three Modes {.subheading}

Next, before the sacrifice, the brahmin high priest taught the three
modes to the king. 'Now, though the king wants to perform a great
sacrifice, he might have certain regrets, thinking: "I shall lose a
great fortune,"
or[432](#endnotes.xhtml_note-432){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-432
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "I am losing a great fortune," or "I have
lost a great fortune." But the king should not harbor such regrets.'

These are the three modes that the brahmin high priest taught to the
king before the sacrifice.

#### 4.5. The Ten Respects {.subheading}

Next, before the sacrifice, the brahmin high priest dispelled the king's
regret regarding the recipients in ten
respects:[433](#endnotes.xhtml_note-433){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-433
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'There will come to the sacrifice those who kill living creatures and
those who refrain from killing living creatures. As to those who kill
living creatures, the outcome of that is theirs alone. But as to those
who refrain from killing living creatures, it is for their sakes that
the king should sacrifice, relinquish, rejoice, and gain confidence in
his
heart.[434](#endnotes.xhtml_note-434){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-434
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There will come to the sacrifice those who steal ... commit sexual
misconduct ... lie ... use divisive speech ... use harsh speech ... talk
nonsense ... are covetous ... have ill will ... have wrong view and
those who have right view. As to those who have wrong view, the outcome
of that is theirs alone. But as to those who have right view, it is for
their sakes that the king should sacrifice, relinquish, rejoice, and
gain confidence in his heart.'

These are the ten respects in which the high priest dispelled the king's
regret regarding the recipients before the sacrifice.

#### 4.6. The Sixteen Respects {.subheading}

Next, while the king was performing the great sacrifice, the brahmin
high priest educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the king's mind
in sixteen respects:

'Now, while the king is performing the great sacrifice, someone might
say, "King Mahāvijita performs a great sacrifice, but he did not
announce it to the aristocrat vassals of town and
country.[435](#endnotes.xhtml_note-435){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-435
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of great sacrifice that
this king performs." Those who speak against the king in this way have
no legitimacy. For the king did indeed announce it to the aristocrat
vassals of town and country. Let the king know this as a reason to
sacrifice, relinquish, rejoice, and gain confidence in his heart.

While the king is performing the great sacrifice, someone might say,
"King Mahāvijita performs a great sacrifice, but he did not announce it
to the aristocrat vassals; the ministers and councillors; the well-to-do
brahmins; and the well-off householders. That's the kind of great
sacrifice that this king performs." Those who speak against the king in
this way have no legitimacy. For the king did indeed announce it to all
these
people.[436](#endnotes.xhtml_note-436){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-436
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let the king know this too as a reason to
sacrifice, relinquish, rejoice, and gain confidence in his heart.

While the king is performing the great sacrifice, someone might say that
he does not possess the eight factors. Those who speak against the king
in this way have no legitimacy. For the king does indeed possess the
eight factors. Let the king know this too as a reason to sacrifice,
relinquish, rejoice, and gain confidence in his heart.

While the king is performing the great sacrifice, someone might say that
the high priest does not possess the four factors. Those who speak
against the king in this way have no legitimacy. For the high priest
does indeed possess the four factors. Let the king know this too as a
reason to sacrifice, relinquish, rejoice, and gain confidence in his
heart.'

These are the sixteen respects in which the high priest educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired the king's mind while he was
performing the sacrifice.

And brahmin, in that sacrifice no cattle were killed, no goats or sheep
were killed, and no chickens or pigs were killed. There was no slaughter
of various kinds of creatures. No trees were felled for the sacrificial
post. No grass was reaped to strew over the place of sacrifice. No
bondservants, servants, or workers did their jobs under threat of
punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces. Those who wished to
work did so, while those who did not wish to did
not.[437](#endnotes.xhtml_note-437){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-437
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They did the work they wanted to, and did
not do what they didn't want to. The sacrifice was completed with just
ghee, oil, butter, curds, honey, and
molasses.[438](#endnotes.xhtml_note-438){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-438
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the aristocrat vassals, ministers and councillors, well-to-do
brahmins, and well-off householders came to the king bringing abundant
wealth and said, 'Sire, this abundant wealth is specially for you alone;
may Your Highness accept
it!'[439](#endnotes.xhtml_note-439){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-439
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'There's enough raised for me through regular taxes. Let this be for
you; and here, take even more!'

When the king turned them down, they withdrew to one side to think up a
plan, 'It wouldn't be proper for us to take this abundant wealth back to
our own homes. King Mahāvijita is performing a great sacrifice. Let us
make an offering as an auxiliary sacrifice.'

Then the aristocrat vassals of town and country set up gifts to the east
of the sacrificial enclosure. The ministers and councillors of town and
country set up gifts to the south of the sacrificial enclosure. The
well-to-do brahmins of town and country set up gifts to the west of the
sacrificial enclosure. The well-off householders of town and country set
up gifts to the north of the sacrificial enclosure.

And brahmin, in that sacrifice too no cattle were killed, no goats were
killed, and no chickens or pigs were killed. There was no slaughter of
various kinds of creatures. No trees were felled for the sacrificial
post. No grass was reaped to strew over the place of sacrifice. No
bondservants, servants, or workers did their jobs under threat of
punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces. Those who wished to
work did so, while those who did not wish to did not. They did the work
they wanted to, and did not do what they didn't want to. The sacrifice
was completed with just ghee, oil, butter, curds, honey, and molasses.

And so there were four consenting factions, eight factors possessed by
King Mahāvijita, four factors possessed by the high priest, and three
modes. Brahmin, this is called the sacrifice accomplished with three
modes and sixteen accessories."

When he said this, those brahmins made an
uproar,[440](#endnotes.xhtml_note-440){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-440
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Hooray for such sacrifice! Hooray for the
accomplishment of such sacrifice!"

But the brahmin Kūṭadanta sat in
silence.[441](#endnotes.xhtml_note-441){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-441
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So those brahmins said to him, "How can you
not applaud the ascetic Gotama's fine words?"

"It's not that I don't applaud what he said. If anyone didn't applaud
such fine words, their head would explode!

But, gentlemen, it occurs to me that the ascetic Gotama does not say:
'So I have heard' or 'It ought to be like
this.'[442](#endnotes.xhtml_note-442){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-442
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, he just says: 'So it was then, this
is how it was then.'

It occurs to me that the ascetic Gotama at that time must have been King
Mahāvijita, the owner of the sacrifice, or else the brahmin high priest
who facilitated the sacrifice for him.

Does Mister Gotama recall having performed such a sacrifice, or having
facilitated it, and then, when his body broke up, after death, being
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?"

"I do recall that, brahmin. For I myself was the brahmin high priest at
that time who facilitated the
sacrifice."[443](#endnotes.xhtml_note-443){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-443
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. A Regular Gift as an Ongoing Family Sacrifice. {.subheading}

"But Mister Gotama, apart from that sacrifice accomplished with three
modes and sixteen accessories, is there any other sacrifice that has
fewer requirements and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and
beneficial?"[444](#endnotes.xhtml_note-444){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-444
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There is, brahmin."

"But what is it?"

"The regular gifts as ongoing family sacrifice given specially to
ethical
renunciates;[445](#endnotes.xhtml_note-445){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-445
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this sacrifice, brahmin, has fewer
requirements and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial."

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why those regular
gifts as ongoing family sacrifice have fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet are more fruitful and beneficial, compared with the
sacrifice accomplished with three modes and sixteen accessories?"

"Because neither perfected ones nor those who are on the path to
perfection will attend such a sacrifice. Why is that? Because beatings
and throttlings are seen
there.[446](#endnotes.xhtml_note-446){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-446
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But the regular gifts as ongoing family sacrifice given specially to
ethical renunciates; perfected ones and those who are on the path to
perfection will attend such a sacrifice. Why is that? Because no
beatings and throttlings are seen there.

This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why those regular gifts
as ongoing family sacrifice have fewer requirements and undertakings,
yet are more fruitful and beneficial, compared with the sacrifice
accomplished with three modes and sixteen accessories."

"But Mister Gotama, apart from that sacrifice accomplished with three
modes and sixteen accessories and those regular gifts as ongoing family
sacrifice, is there any other sacrifice that has fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

"There is, brahmin."

"But what is it?"

"When someone gives a dwelling specially for the Saṅgha of the four
quarters."[447](#endnotes.xhtml_note-447){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-447
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But is there any other sacrifice that has fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

"When someone with confident heart goes for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha."

"But is there any other sacrifice that has fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

"When someone with a confident heart undertakes the training rules to
refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct,
lying, and beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants."[448](#endnotes.xhtml_note-448){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-448
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But is there any other sacrifice that has fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

"There is, brahmin.

It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
... They enter and remain in the first absorption ... This sacrifice has
fewer requirements and undertakings than the former, yet is more
fruitful and beneficial. ...

They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. This sacrifice has fewer requirements and
undertakings than the former, yet is more fruitful and beneficial. ...

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision ... This
sacrifice has fewer requirements and undertakings than the former, yet
is more fruitful and beneficial.

They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.' This
sacrifice has fewer requirements and undertakings than the former, yet
is more fruitful and beneficial. And, brahmin, there is no other
accomplishment of sacrifice which is better and finer than
this."[449](#endnotes.xhtml_note-449){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-449
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 6. Kūṭadanta Declares Himself a Lay Follower {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Kūṭadanta said to the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister
Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing
the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in
the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama
has made the Teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister
Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life.

And these bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams---seven hundred of
each---I release them, I grant them life! Let them eat green grass and
drink cool water, and may a cool breeze blow upon
them!"[450](#endnotes.xhtml_note-450){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-450
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 7. The Realization of the Fruit of Stream-Entry {.subheading}

Then the Buddha taught Kūṭadanta step by step, with a talk on giving,
ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual
pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. And
when he knew that Kūṭadanta's mind was ready, pliable, rid of
hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the special teaching of
the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just as
a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very seat
the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the brahmin
Kūṭadanta: "Everything that has a beginning has an end."

Then Kūṭadanta saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He
went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. He said to
the Buddha, "Would Mister Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha
please accept tomorrow's meal from me?" The Buddha consented with
silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Kūṭadanta got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving. And when the night had passed Kūṭadanta had
delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own sacrificial
enclosure. Then he had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, "It's
time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the sacrificial enclosure of Kūṭadanta together with the
mendicant Saṅgha, where he sat on the seat spread out.

Then Kūṭadanta served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the
Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. When
the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Kūṭadanta took a low
seat and sat to one side. Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired
up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his
seat and left.

</article>
<article id="dn6">

## [DN 6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. On the Brahmin Emissaries {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof.[451](#endnotes.xhtml_note-451){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-451
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now at that time several brahmin emissaries
from Kosala and Magadha were residing in Vesālī on some
business.[452](#endnotes.xhtml_note-452){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-452
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---is staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the
peaked
roof.[453](#endnotes.xhtml_note-453){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-453
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then they went to the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood to see
the Buddha.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's attendant. The
brahmin emissaries went up to him and said, "Mister Nāgita, where is
Mister Gotama at present? For we want to see him."

"It's the wrong time to see the Buddha; he is on
retreat."[454](#endnotes.xhtml_note-454){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-454
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So right there the brahmin emissaries sat down to one side, thinking,
"We'll go only after we've seen Mister Gotama."

### 2. On Oṭṭhaddha the Licchavi {.subheading}

Oṭṭhaddha the Licchavi together with a large assembly of Licchavis also
approached Nāgita at the hall with the peaked roof. He bowed, stood to
one side, and said to
Nāgita,[455](#endnotes.xhtml_note-455){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-455
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Mister Nāgita, where is the Blessed One at
present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha? For we want to
see him."

"It's the wrong time to see the Buddha; he is on retreat."

So right there Oṭṭhaddha also sat down to one side, thinking, "I'll go
only after I've seen the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha."

Then the novice Sīha approached Nāgita. He bowed, stood to one side, and
said to
Nāgita,[456](#endnotes.xhtml_note-456){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-456
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Honorable Kassapa, these several brahmin
emissaries from Kosala and Magadha, and also Oṭṭhaddha the Licchavi
together with a large assembly of Licchavis, have come here to see the
Buddha. It'd be good if these people got to see the
Buddha."[457](#endnotes.xhtml_note-457){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-457
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, Sīha, tell the Buddha
yourself."[458](#endnotes.xhtml_note-458){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-458
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Sīha. He went to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one
side, and told him of the people waiting to see him, adding: "Sir, it'd
be good if these people got to see the Buddha."

"Well then, Sīha, spread out a seat in the shade of the dwelling."

"Yes, sir," replied Sīha, and he did so.

Then the Buddha came out of his dwelling and sat in the shade of the
dwelling on the seat spread
out.[459](#endnotes.xhtml_note-459){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-459
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the brahmin emissaries went up to the
Buddha, and exchanged greetings with
him.[460](#endnotes.xhtml_note-460){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-460
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they sat down to one side.

Oṭṭhaddha the Licchavi together with a large assembly of Licchavis also
went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Oṭṭhaddha said
to the Buddha, "Sir, a few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me
and
said:[461](#endnotes.xhtml_note-461){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-461
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Mahāli, soon I will have been living in
dependence on the Buddha for three years. I see heavenly sights that are
pleasant, sensual, and arousing, but I don't hear heavenly sounds that
are pleasant, sensual, and
arousing.'[462](#endnotes.xhtml_note-462){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-462
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The heavenly sounds that Sunakkhatta cannot
hear: do such sounds really exist or not?"

#### 2.1. One-Sided Immersion {.subheading}

"Such sounds really do exist, but Sunakkhatta cannot hear
them."[463](#endnotes.xhtml_note-463){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-463
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why Sunakkhatta cannot hear
them, even though they really do exist?"

"Mahāli, take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the eastern
quarter in one aspect: so as to see heavenly sights but not to hear
heavenly
sounds.[464](#endnotes.xhtml_note-464){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-464
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they have developed immersion for that
purpose, they see heavenly sights but don't hear heavenly sounds. Why is
that? Because that is how it is for a mendicant who develops immersion
in that way.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the
southern quarter in one aspect ... western quarter ... northern quarter
... above, below, across ... That is how it is for a mendicant who
develops immersion in that way.

Take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the eastern quarter in
one aspect: so as to hear heavenly sounds but not to see heavenly
sights. When they have developed immersion for that purpose, they hear
heavenly sounds but don't see heavenly sights. Why is that? Because that
is how it is for a mendicant who develops immersion in that way.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the
southern quarter in one aspect ... western quarter ... northern quarter
... above, below, across ... That is how it is for a mendicant who
develops immersion in that way.

Take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the eastern quarter in
both aspects: so as to hear heavenly sounds and see heavenly sights.
When they have developed immersion for that purpose, they see heavenly
sights and hear heavenly sounds. Why is that? Because that is how it is
for a mendicant who develops immersion in that way.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has developed immersion to the
southern quarter in both aspects ... western quarter ... northern
quarter ... above, below, across ... That is how it is for a mendicant
who develops immersion in that way. This is the cause, Mahāli, this is
the reason why Sunakkhatta cannot hear heavenly sounds that are
pleasant, sensual, and arousing, even though they really do exist."

"Surely the mendicants must lead the spiritual life under the Buddha for
the sake of realizing such a development of immersion?"

"No, Mahāli, the mendicants don't lead the spiritual life under me for
the sake of realizing such a development of
immersion.[465](#endnotes.xhtml_note-465){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-465
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are other things that are finer, for
the sake of which the mendicants lead the spiritual life under me."

#### 2.2. The Four Noble Fruits {.subheading}

"But sir, what are those finer things?"

"Firstly, Mahāli, with the ending of three fetters a mendicant is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.[466](#endnotes.xhtml_note-466){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-466
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is one of the finer things for the
sake of which the mendicants lead the spiritual life under me.

Furthermore, a mendicant---with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---is a once-returner. They come
back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. This too is
one of the finer things.

Furthermore, with the ending of the five lower fetters, a mendicant is
reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to
return from that
world.[467](#endnotes.xhtml_note-467){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-467
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too is one of the finer things.

Furthermore, a mendicant has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.[468](#endnotes.xhtml_note-468){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-468
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too is one of the finer things.

These are the finer things, for the sake of which the mendicants lead
the spiritual life under me."

#### 2.3. The Noble Eightfold Path {.subheading}

"But, sir, is there a path and a practice for realizing these things?"

"There is, Mahāli."

"Well, what is it?"

"It is simply this noble eightfold path, that
is:[469](#endnotes.xhtml_note-469){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-469
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right
immersion.[470](#endnotes.xhtml_note-470){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-470
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the path and the practice for
realizing these things.

#### 2.4. On the Two Renunciates {.subheading}

This one time, Mahāli, I was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery.[471](#endnotes.xhtml_note-471){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-471
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then two renunciates---the wanderer Muṇḍiya
and Jāliya, the pupil of the wood-bowl ascetic---came and exchanged
greetings with
me.[472](#endnotes.xhtml_note-472){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-472
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they stood to one side and said to me: 'Reverend Gotama, are
the soul and the body the same thing, or they are different
things?'[473](#endnotes.xhtml_note-473){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-473
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.'

'Yes, reverend,' they replied.

I said this: 'Take the case when a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is
accomplished in ethics. ...

They enter and remain in the first absorption. When a mendicant knows
and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of them: "The soul
and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the body are different
things"?'

'It would,
reverend.'[474](#endnotes.xhtml_note-474){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-474
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
"The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the body are
different things". ...

They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. When a mendicant knows and sees like this, would it
be appropriate to say of them: "The soul and the body are the same
thing" or "The soul and the body are different things"?'

'It would, reverend.'

'But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
"The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the body are
different things". ...

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision ... When a
mendicant knows and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of
them: "The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the
body are different things"?'

'It would, reverend.'

'But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
"The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the body are
different things". ...

They understand: "... there is nothing further for this place." When a
mendicant knows and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of
them: "The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the
body are different things"?'

'It would not,
reverend.'[475](#endnotes.xhtml_note-475){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-475
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
"The soul and the body are the same thing" or "The soul and the body are
different things".'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Oṭṭhaddha the Licchavi approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn7">

## [DN 7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Jāliya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jāliyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery.[476](#endnotes.xhtml_note-476){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-476
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time two renunciates---the wanderer Muṇḍiya and Jāliya, the
pupil of the wood-bowl ascetic---came to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, they stood to one side and said to the Buddha, "Reverend Gotama,
are the soul and the body the same thing, or they are different things?"

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take the case when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in
ethics. ...

They enter and remain in the first absorption ... When a mendicant knows
and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of them: 'The soul
and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the body are different
things'?"

"It would, reverend."

"But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the body are
different things'. ...

They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. When a mendicant knows and sees like this, would it
be appropriate to say of them: 'The soul and the body are the same
thing' or 'The soul and the body are different things'?"

"It would, reverend."

"But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the body are
different things'. ...

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision ... When a
mendicant knows and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of
them: 'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the
body are different things'?"

"It would, reverend."

"But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the body are
different things'. ...

They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.' When a
mendicant knows and sees like this, would it be appropriate to say of
them: 'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the
body are different things'?"

"It would not, reverend."

"But reverends, I know and see like this. Nevertheless, I do not say:
'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and the body are
different things'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the two renunciates approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn8">

## [DN 8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion's Roar to the Naked Ascetic Kassapa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Ujuññā, in the deer park at
Kaṇṇakatthala.[477](#endnotes.xhtml_note-477){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-477
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the naked ascetic Kassapa went up to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with
him.[478](#endnotes.xhtml_note-478){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-478
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard the following: 'The ascetic Gotama
criticizes all fervent mortification. He categorically condemns and
denounces all fervent mortifiers who live
rough.'[479](#endnotes.xhtml_note-479){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-479
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do those who say this repeat what the
Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their
explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds
for rebuttal and criticism? For we don't want to misrepresent Mister
Gotama."

"Kassapa, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false, baseless, and untrue. With
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I see some fervent
mortifier who lives rough reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But I see another fervent mortifier who lives rough
reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.[480](#endnotes.xhtml_note-480){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-480
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I see some fervent mortifier who takes it easy reborn in a place of
loss. But I see another fervent mortifier who takes it easy reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. Since I truly understand the coming and
going, passing away and rebirth of these fervent mortifiers in this way,
how could I criticize all forms of mortification, or categorically
condemn and denounce those fervent mortifiers who live rough?

There are some clever ascetics and brahmins who are subtle, accomplished
in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd think they live to
demolish convictions with their intellect. They agree with me in some
matters and disagree in others. Some of the things that they applaud, I
also applaud. Some of the things that they don't applaud, I also don't
applaud. But some of the things that they applaud, I don't applaud. And
some of the things that they don't applaud, I do applaud.

Some of the things that I applaud, others also applaud. Some of the
things that I don't applaud, they also don't applaud. But some of the
things that I don't applaud, others do applaud. And some of the things
that I do applaud, others don't applaud.

### 1. Examination {.subheading}

I go up to them and say: 'Let us leave aside those matters on which we
disagree.[481](#endnotes.xhtml_note-481){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-481
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But there are some matters on which we
agree. Regarding these, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and
grilling, would compare teacher with teacher or community with
community:

"There are things that are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be
cultivated, unworthy of the noble ones, and dark---and are reckoned as
such. Who proceeds having totally given these things up: the ascetic
Gotama, or the tutors of other
communities?"'[482](#endnotes.xhtml_note-482){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-482
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama proceeds having
totally given those unskillful things up, compared with the tutors of
other communities.' And that's how, when sensible people pursue the
matter, they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are skillful, blameless, worth cultivating, worthy of the
noble ones, and bright---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds having
totally undertaken these things: the ascetic Gotama, or the tutors of
other communities?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama proceeds having
totally undertaken these things, compared with the tutors of other
communities.' And that's how, when sensible people pursue the matter,
they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be cultivated, unworthy
of the noble ones, and dark---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds
having totally given these things up: the ascetic Gotama's disciples, or
the disciples of other tutors?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama's disciples
proceed having totally given those unskillful things up, compared with
the disciples of other tutors.' And that's how, when sensible people
pursue the matter, they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are skillful, blameless, worth cultivating, worthy of the
noble ones, and bright---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds having
totally undertaken these things: the ascetic Gotama's disciples, or the
disciples of other tutors?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama's disciples
proceed having totally undertaken those skillful things, compared with
the disciples of other tutors.' And that's how, when sensible people
pursue the matter, they will mostly praise us.

### 2. The Noble Eightfold Path {.subheading}

There is, Kassapa, a path, there is a practice, practicing in accordance
with which you will know and see for yourself: 'Only the ascetic
Gotama's words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the
teaching and
training.'[483](#endnotes.xhtml_note-483){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-483
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is that path? It is simply this
noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion. This is the path, this is the practice, practicing in
accordance with which you will know and see for yourself: 'Only the
ascetic Gotama's words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with
the teaching and
training.'"[484](#endnotes.xhtml_note-484){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-484
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 3. The Courses of Fervent Mortification {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha:

"Reverend Gotama, those ascetics and brahmins consider these courses of
fervent mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or
brahmin.[485](#endnotes.xhtml_note-485){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-485
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They go naked, ignoring conventions. They
lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent
to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an
invitation for a
meal.[486](#endnotes.xhtml_note-486){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-486
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
beer or wine, and drink no fermented
gruel.[487](#endnotes.xhtml_note-487){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-487
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They go to just one house for alms, taking
just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses
and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day,
up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once every second day,
up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live
committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals.

Those ascetics and brahmins also consider these courses of fervent
mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or brahmin. They
eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum
from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on
forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen
fruit.[488](#endnotes.xhtml_note-488){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-488
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Those ascetics and brahmins also consider these courses of fervent
mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or brahmin. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls'
wings.[489](#endnotes.xhtml_note-489){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-489
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They tear out hair and beard, committed to
this
practice.[490](#endnotes.xhtml_note-490){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-490
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They constantly stand, refusing
seats.[491](#endnotes.xhtml_note-491){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-491
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They squat, committed to persisting in the
squatting position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns
their bed. They make their bed on a plank, or the bare ground. They lie
only on one side. They wear dust and
dirt.[492](#endnotes.xhtml_note-492){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-492
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They stay in the open air. They sleep
wherever they lay their mat. They eat unnatural things, committed to the
practice of eating unnatural
foods.[493](#endnotes.xhtml_note-493){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-493
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't drink, committed to the practice
of not drinking liquids. They're devoted to ritual bathing three times a
day, including the
evening."[494](#endnotes.xhtml_note-494){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-494
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 4. The Uselessness of Fervent Mortification {.subheading}

"Kassapa, someone may practice all those forms of mortification, but if
they haven't developed and realized any accomplishment in ethics, mind,
and wisdom, they are far from being a true ascetic or
brahmin.[495](#endnotes.xhtml_note-495){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-495
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But take a mendicant who develops a heart
of love, free of enmity and ill will. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.[496](#endnotes.xhtml_note-496){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-496
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they achieve this, they're a mendicant
who is called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true brahmin'. ..."

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "It's hard, Mister
Gotama, to be a true ascetic or a true brahmin."

"It's typical, Kassapa, in this world to think that it's hard to be a
true ascetic or brahmin. But someone might practice all those forms of
mortification. And if it was only because of just that much, only
because of that course of fervent mortification that it was so very hard
to be a true ascetic or brahmin, it wouldn't be appropriate to say that
it's hard to be a true ascetic or brahmin.

For it would be quite possible for a householder or a householder's
child---or even the bonded maid who carries the water-jar---to practice
all those forms of mortification.

It's because there's something other than just that much, something
other than that course of fervent mortification that it's so very hard
to be a true ascetic or brahmin. And that's why it is appropriate to say
that it's hard to be a true ascetic or brahmin. Take a mendicant who
develops a heart of love, free of enmity and ill will. And they realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life,
and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.[497](#endnotes.xhtml_note-497){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-497
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they achieve this, they're a mendicant
who is called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true brahmin'. ..."

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "It's hard, Mister
Gotama, to know a true ascetic or a true brahmin."

"It's typical in this world to think that it's hard to know a true
ascetic or brahmin. But someone might practice all those forms of
mortification. And if it was only by just that much, only by that course
of fervent mortification that it was so very hard to know a true ascetic
or brahmin, it wouldn't be appropriate to say that it's hard to know a
true ascetic or brahmin.

For it would be quite possible for a householder or a householder's
child---or even the bonded maid who carries the water-jar---to know that
someone is practicing all those forms of mortification.

It's because there's something other than just that much, something
other than that course of fervent mortification that it's so very hard
to know a true ascetic or brahmin. And that's why it is appropriate to
say that it's hard to know a true ascetic or brahmin. Take a mendicant
who develops a heart of love, free of enmity and ill will. And they
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. When they achieve this, they're a mendicant who
is called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true brahmin'."

### 5. The Accomplishment of Ethics, Mind, and Wisdom {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "But Mister Gotama, what
is that accomplishment in ethics, in mind, and in
wisdom?"[498](#endnotes.xhtml_note-498){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-498
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... Seeing danger in the slightest fault, a mendicant
keeps the rules they've undertaken. They act skillfully by body and
speech. They're purified in livelihood and accomplished in ethical
conduct. They guard the sense doors, have mindfulness and situational
awareness, and are content.

And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a mendicant
gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword.
They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living
beings. This pertains to their accomplishment in ethics. ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. ... They
refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to
their accomplishment in ethics.

A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their ethical restraint. It's like a king who has defeated
his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. In the same
way, a mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any
quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. When they have this
entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness
inside themselves. That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
This, Kassapa, is that accomplishment in ethics. ... They enter and
remain in the first absorption ... This pertains to their accomplishment
in mind. ... They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. This pertains to their accomplishment
in mind. This, Kassapa, is that accomplishment in mind.

When their mind is immersed like this, they project it and extend it
toward knowledge and vision ... This pertains to their accomplishment in
wisdom. ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.' This pertains to their accomplishment in wisdom. This, Kassapa,
is that accomplishment in wisdom.

And, Kassapa, there is no accomplishment in ethics, mind, and wisdom
that is better or finer than this.

### 6. The Lion's Roar {.subheading}

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach ethics. They
praise ethical conduct in many ways. But as far as the highest noble
ethics goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior.
Rather, I am the one who is superior when it comes to the higher
ethics.[499](#endnotes.xhtml_note-499){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-499
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach mortification
in disgust of
sin.[500](#endnotes.xhtml_note-500){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-500
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They praise fervent mortification in
disgust of sin in many ways. But as far as the highest noble fervent
mortification in disgust of sin goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal,
still less my superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher disgust of
sin.[501](#endnotes.xhtml_note-501){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-501
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach wisdom. They
praise wisdom in many ways. But as far as the highest noble wisdom goes,
I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior. Rather, I am
the one who is superior when it comes to the higher wisdom.

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach freedom. They
praise freedom in many ways. But as far as the highest noble freedom
goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior. Rather,
I am the one who is superior when it comes to the higher freedom.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama only roars his lion's roar in an empty hut, not in an
assembly.'[502](#endnotes.xhtml_note-502){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-502
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They should be told, 'Not so!' What should
be said is this: 'The ascetic Gotama roars his lion's roar, and he roars
it in the assemblies.'

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar, and he roars it in the assemblies. But he
doesn't roar it boldly.' They should be told, 'Not so!' What should be
said is this: 'The ascetic Gotama roars his lion's roar, he roars it in
the assemblies, and he roars it boldly.'

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar, he roars it in the assemblies, and he
roars it boldly. But they don't question him. ... Or he doesn't answer
their questions. ... Or his answers are not satisfactory. ... Or they
don't think him worth listening to. ... Or they're not confident after
listening. ... Or they don't show their confidence. ... Or they don't
practice accordingly. ... Or they don't succeed in their practice.' They
should be told, 'Not so!' What should be said is this: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar; he roars it in the assemblies; he roars it
boldly; they question him; he answers their questions; his answers are
satisfactory; they think him worth listening to; they're confident after
listening; they show their confidence; they practice accordingly; and
they succeed in their practice.'

### 7. The Probation For One Previously Ordained {.subheading}

Kassapa, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's
Peak Mountain. There a certain fervent celibate named Nigrodha asked me
about the higher disgust of
sin.[503](#endnotes.xhtml_note-503){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-503
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I answered his question. He was extremely
happy with my answer."

"Sir, who wouldn't be extremely happy after hearing the Buddha's
teaching? For I too am extremely happy after hearing the Buddha's
teaching! Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, so too the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many
ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in
the Buddha's presence?"

"Kassapa, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take
the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into
monkhood.[504](#endnotes.xhtml_note-504){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-504
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} However, I have recognized individual
differences in this
matter."[505](#endnotes.xhtml_note-505){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-505
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

And the naked ascetic Kassapa received the going forth, the ordination
in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable
Kassapa, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon
realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He
lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Kassapa became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="dn9">

## [DN 9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Poṭṭhapāda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Poṭṭhapādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. On the Wanderer Poṭṭhapāda {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda was residing together with
three hundred wanderers in Mallikā's single-halled monastery for
philosophical debates, hedged by pale-moon ebony
trees.[506](#endnotes.xhtml_note-506){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-506
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha robed up in the morning
and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to wander for alms in
Sāvatthī.[507](#endnotes.xhtml_note-507){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-507
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I go to Mallikā's monastery to
visit the wanderer
Poṭṭhapāda?"[508](#endnotes.xhtml_note-508){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-508
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what he did.

Now at that time, Poṭṭhapāda was sitting together with a large assembly
of wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all
kinds of low talk, such
as[509](#endnotes.xhtml_note-509){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-509
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

Poṭṭhapāda saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. Here comes the
ascetic Gotama. The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. Hopefully
if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to
approach."[510](#endnotes.xhtml_note-510){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-510
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then those wanderers fell silent.

Then the Buddha approached Poṭṭhapāda, who said to him, "Let the Blessed
One come,
sir\![511](#endnotes.xhtml_note-511){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-511
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been
a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir,
sit down, this seat is ready."

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while Poṭṭhapāda took a low seat
and sat to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Poṭṭhapāda, what were you
sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"[512](#endnotes.xhtml_note-512){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-512
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 1.1. On the Cessation of Perception {.subheading}

When he said this, the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda said to the Buddha, "Sir,
leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now. It won't be
hard for you to hear about that later.

Sir, a few days ago several ascetics and brahmins who follow various
other religions were sitting together at the debating hall, and a
discussion about the cessation of perception came up among
them:[513](#endnotes.xhtml_note-513){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-513
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'How does the cessation of perception
happen?'[514](#endnotes.xhtml_note-514){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-514
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Some of them said: 'A person's perceptions arise and cease without cause
or
reason.[515](#endnotes.xhtml_note-515){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-515
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they arise, you become percipient.
When they cease, you become non-percipient.' That's how some describe
the cessation of perception.

But someone else says: 'That's not how it is, good
sirs\![516](#endnotes.xhtml_note-516){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-516
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Perception is a person's
self,[517](#endnotes.xhtml_note-517){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-517
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} which enters and departs. When it enters,
you become percipient. When it departs, you become
non-percipient.'[518](#endnotes.xhtml_note-518){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-518
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how some describe the cessation of
perception.

But someone else says: 'That's not how it is, good sirs! There are
ascetics and brahmins of great power and
might.[519](#endnotes.xhtml_note-519){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-519
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They insert and extract a person's
perception.[520](#endnotes.xhtml_note-520){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-520
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they insert it, you become percipient.
When they extract it, you become non-percipient.' That's how some
describe the cessation of perception.

But someone else says: 'That's not how it is, good sirs! There are
deities of great power and might. They insert and extract a person's
perception. When they insert it, you become percipient. When they
extract it, you become non-percipient.' That's how some describe the
cessation of perception.

That reminded me of the Buddha: 'Surely it must be the Blessed One, the
Holy One who is so very skilled in such matters.' The Buddha is skilled
and well-versed concerning the cessation of
perception.[521](#endnotes.xhtml_note-521){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-521
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How does the cessation of perception
happen?"

#### 1.2. Perception Arises With a Cause {.subheading}

"Regarding this, Poṭṭhapāda, those ascetics and brahmins who say that a
person's perceptions arise and cease without cause or reason are wrong
from the start. Why is that? Because a person's perceptions arise and
cease with cause and reason. With training, certain perceptions arise
and certain perceptions
cease.[522](#endnotes.xhtml_note-522){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-522
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is that training?" said the
Buddha.[523](#endnotes.xhtml_note-523){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-523
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
...[524](#endnotes.xhtml_note-524){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-524
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. The sensual perception that they had previously
ceases.[525](#endnotes.xhtml_note-525){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-525
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time they have a subtle and true
perception of the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion.[526](#endnotes.xhtml_note-526){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-526
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how, with training, certain
perceptions arise and certain perceptions cease. And this is that
training," said the Buddha.

"Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. The
subtle and true perception of the rapture and bliss born of seclusion
that they had previously ceases. At that time they have a subtle and
true perception of the rapture and bliss born of immersion. That's how,
with training, certain perceptions arise and certain perceptions cease.
And this is that training," said the Buddha.

"Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' The
subtle and true perception of the rapture and bliss born of immersion
that they had previously ceases. At that time they have a subtle and
true perception of bliss with equanimity. That's how, with training,
certain perceptions arise and certain perceptions cease. And this is
that training," said the Buddha.

"Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. The
subtle and true perception of bliss with equanimity that they had
previously ceases. At that time they have a subtle and true perception
of neutral feeling. That's how, with training, certain perceptions arise
and certain perceptions cease. And this is that training," said the
Buddha.

"Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form,
with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite
space.[527](#endnotes.xhtml_note-527){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-527
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The perception of luminous form that they
had previously
ceases.[528](#endnotes.xhtml_note-528){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-528
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time they have a subtle and true
perception of the dimension of infinite
space.[529](#endnotes.xhtml_note-529){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-529
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how, with training, certain
perceptions arise and certain perceptions cease. And this is that
training," said the Buddha.

"Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite
consciousness.[530](#endnotes.xhtml_note-530){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-530
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The subtle and true perception of the
dimension of infinite space that they had previously ceases. At that
time they have a subtle and true perception of the dimension of infinite
consciousness. That's how, with training, certain perceptions arise and
certain perceptions cease. And this is that training," said the Buddha.

"Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and
remains in the dimension of
nothingness.[531](#endnotes.xhtml_note-531){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-531
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The subtle and true perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness that they had previously ceases. At
that time they have a subtle and true perception of the dimension of
nothingness. That's how, with training, certain perceptions arise and
certain perceptions
cease.[532](#endnotes.xhtml_note-532){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-532
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this is that training," said the
Buddha.

"Poṭṭhapāda, from the time a mendicant here takes charge of their own
perception, they proceed from one stage to the next, progressively
reaching the peak of
perception.[533](#endnotes.xhtml_note-533){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-533
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Standing on the peak of perception they
think, 'Intentionality is bad for me, it's better to be free of it. For
if I were to intend and choose, these perceptions would cease in me, and
other coarser perceptions would
arise.[534](#endnotes.xhtml_note-534){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-534
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I neither make a choice nor form
an intention?' They neither make a choice nor form an intention. Those
perceptions cease in them, and other coarser perceptions don't arise.
They touch cessation. And that, Poṭṭhapāda, is how the progressive
cessation of perception is attained with
awareness.[535](#endnotes.xhtml_note-535){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-535
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? Have you ever heard of this before?"

"No,
sir.[536](#endnotes.xhtml_note-536){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-536
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how I understand what the Buddha
said:[537](#endnotes.xhtml_note-537){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-537
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'From the time a mendicant here takes
charge of their own perception, they proceed from one stage to the next,
progressively reaching the peak of perception. Standing on the peak of
perception they think, "Intentionality is bad for me, it's better to be
free of it. For if I were to intend and choose, these perceptions would
cease in me, and other coarser perceptions would arise. Why don't I
neither make a choice nor form an intention?" Those perceptions cease in
them, and other coarser perceptions don't arise. They touch cessation.
And that is how the progressive cessation of perception is attained with
awareness.'"

"That's right, Poṭṭhapāda."

"Does the Buddha describe just one peak of perception, or many?"

"I describe the peak of perception as both one and many."

"But sir, how do you describe it as one peak and as many?"

"I describe the peak of perception according to the specific manner in
which one touches
cessation.[538](#endnotes.xhtml_note-538){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-538
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how I describe the peak of
perception as both one and many."

"But sir, does perception arise first and knowledge afterwards? Or does
knowledge arise first and perception afterwards? Or do they both arise
at the same
time?"[539](#endnotes.xhtml_note-539){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-539
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Perception arises first and knowledge afterwards. The arising of
perception leads to the arising of
knowledge.[540](#endnotes.xhtml_note-540){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-540
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand, 'My knowledge arose from a
specific
condition.'[541](#endnotes.xhtml_note-541){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-541
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is a way to understand how perception
arises first and knowledge afterwards; that the arising of perception
leads to the arising of knowledge."

#### 1.3. Perception and the Self {.subheading}

"Sir, is perception a person's self, or are perception and self
different
things?"[542](#endnotes.xhtml_note-542){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-542
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Poṭṭhapāda, do you believe in a
self?"[543](#endnotes.xhtml_note-543){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-543
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I believe in a solid self, sir, which is formed, made up of the four
principal states, and consumes solid
food."[544](#endnotes.xhtml_note-544){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-544
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Suppose there were such a solid self, Poṭṭhapāda. In that case,
perception would be one thing, the self
another.[545](#endnotes.xhtml_note-545){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-545
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Here is another way to understand how
perception and self are different things. So long as that solid self
remains, still some perceptions arise in a person and others
cease.[546](#endnotes.xhtml_note-546){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-546
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is a way to understand how perception
and self are different things."

"Sir, I believe in a mind-made self which is whole in its major and
minor limbs, not deficient in any
faculty."[547](#endnotes.xhtml_note-547){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-547
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Suppose there were such a mind-made self, Poṭṭhapāda. In that case,
perception would be one thing, the self another. Here is another way to
understand how perception and self are different things. So long as that
mind-made self remains, still some perceptions arise in a person and
others cease. That too is a way to understand how perception and self
are different things."

"Sir, I believe in a formless self which is made of
perception."[548](#endnotes.xhtml_note-548){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-548
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Suppose there were such a formless self, Poṭṭhapāda. In that case,
perception would be one thing, the self another. Here is another way to
understand how perception and self are different things. So long as that
formless self remains, still some perceptions arise in a person and
others cease. That too is a way to understand how perception and self
are different things."

"But, sir, am I able to know
whether[549](#endnotes.xhtml_note-549){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-549
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} perception is a person's self, or whether
perception and self are different things?"

"It's hard for you to understand this, since you have a different view,
creed, and belief, unless you dedicate yourself to practice with the
guidance of
tradition."[550](#endnotes.xhtml_note-550){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-550
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well, if that's the case, sir, then what do you make of this: 'The
cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile'?"[551](#endnotes.xhtml_note-551){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-551
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This has not been declared by me, Poṭṭhapāda."

"Then what do you make of this: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"This too has not been declared by me."

"Then what do you make of this: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The
cosmos is infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same thing
...' ... 'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A
realized one still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer
exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither still exists
nor no longer exists after death. This is the only truth, anything else
is futile'?"

"This too has not been declared by me."

"Why haven't these things been declared by the Buddha?"

"Because they're not beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the
spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. That's why I
haven't declared them."

"Then what has been declared by the Buddha?"

"I have declared this: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'."

"Why have these things been declared by the Buddha?"

"Because they are beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the
spiritual life. They lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. That's why I have
declared them."

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! Please, sir, go
at your convenience." Then the Buddha got up from his seat and left.

Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers beset Poṭṭhapāda on all
sides with sneering and
jeering.[552](#endnotes.xhtml_note-552){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-552
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "No matter what the ascetic Gotama says,
Poṭṭhapāda agrees with him: 'That's so true, Blessed One! That's so
true, Holy One!' We understand that the ascetic Gotama didn't give any
categorical teaching at all regarding whether the cosmos is eternal and
so on."

When they said this, Poṭṭhapāda said to them, "I too understand that the
ascetic Gotama didn't give any categorical teaching at all regarding
whether the cosmos is eternal and so on. Nevertheless, the practice that
he describes is true, real, and accurate. It is the regularity of
natural principles, the invariance of natural principles. So how could a
sensible person such as I not agree that what was well spoken by the
ascetic Gotama was in fact well spoken?"

### 2. On Citta Hatthisāriputta {.subheading}

Then after two or three days had passed, Citta Hatthisāriputta and
Poṭṭhapāda went to see the Buddha. Citta Hatthisāriputta bowed and sat
down to one
side.[553](#endnotes.xhtml_note-553){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-553
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda exchanged
greetings with the Buddha, and when the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side. Poṭṭhapāda told the
Buddha what had happened after he left. The Buddha said:

"All those wanderers, Poṭṭhapāda, are blind and sightless. You are the
only one whose eyes are clear. For I have taught and pointed out
teachings that are
categorical[554](#endnotes.xhtml_note-554){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-554
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and also teachings that are not
categorical.

And what teachings have I taught and pointed out as not categorical?
'The cosmos is eternal' ... 'The cosmos is not eternal' ... 'The cosmos
is finite' ... 'The cosmos is infinite' ... 'The soul is the same thing
as the body' ... 'The soul and the body are different things' ... 'A
realized one still exists after death' ... 'A realized one no longer
exists after death' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no longer
exists after death' ... 'A realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists after death.'

And why have I taught and pointed out such teachings as not categorical?
Because those things aren't beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals
of the spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. That's why I
have taught and pointed out such teachings as not categorical.

#### 2.1. Teachings That Are Categorical {.subheading}

And what teachings have I taught and pointed out as categorical? 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'.

And why have I taught and pointed out such teachings as categorical?
Because they are beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the
spiritual life. They lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. That's why I have taught
and pointed out such teachings as categorical.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'The self is exclusively happy and free of disease after
death.'[555](#endnotes.xhtml_note-555){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-555
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I go up to them and say, 'Is it really true
that this is the venerables'
view?'[556](#endnotes.xhtml_note-556){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-556
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But
do you meditate knowing and seeing an exclusively happy
world?'[557](#endnotes.xhtml_note-557){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-557
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Asked this, they say, 'No.'

I say to them, 'But have you perceived an exclusively happy self for a
single day or night, or even half a day or
night?'[558](#endnotes.xhtml_note-558){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-558
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Asked this, they say, 'No.'

I say to them, 'But do you know a path and a practice to realize an
exclusively happy
world?'[559](#endnotes.xhtml_note-559){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-559
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Asked this, they say, 'No.'

I say to them, 'But have you ever heard the voice of the deities reborn
in an exclusively happy world saying, "Practice well, dear sirs,
practice sincerely so as to realize an exclusively happy
world.[560](#endnotes.xhtml_note-560){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-560
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this is how we practiced, and we were
reborn in an exclusively happy world"?' Asked this, they say, 'No.'

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? This being so, doesn't what they say turn
out to have no demonstrable
basis?"[561](#endnotes.xhtml_note-561){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-561
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"Suppose, Poṭṭhapāda, a man were to say: 'Whoever the finest lady in the
land is, it is her that I want, her that I
desire!'[562](#endnotes.xhtml_note-562){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-562
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest
lady in the land who you desire---do you know whether she's an
aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant, or a menial?' Asked this, he'd say,
'No.' They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know her name or clan? Whether she's tall or short or
medium? Whether her skin is black, brown, or tawny? What village, town,
or city she comes from?' Asked this, he'd say, 'No.' They'd say to him,
'Mister, do you desire someone who you've never even known or seen?'
Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? This being so, doesn't that man's
statement turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"In the same way, the ascetics and brahmins who have that doctrine and
view ...

Doesn't what they say turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"Suppose a man was to build a ladder at the crossroads for climbing up
to a stilt
longhouse.[563](#endnotes.xhtml_note-563){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-563
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd say to him, 'Mister, that stilt
longhouse that you're building a ladder for---do you know whether it's
to the north, south, east, or west? Or whether it's tall or short or
medium?' Asked this, he'd say, 'No.' They'd say to him, 'Mister, are you
building a ladder for a longhouse that you've never even known or seen?'
Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? This being so, doesn't that man's
statement turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"In the same way, the ascetics and brahmins who have those various
doctrines and views ...

Doesn't what they say turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

#### 2.2. Three Kinds of Reincarnation {.subheading}

"Poṭṭhapāda, there are these three kinds of reincarnation in a
life-form:[564](#endnotes.xhtml_note-564){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-564
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} a solid life-form, a mind-made life-form,
and a formless
life-form.[565](#endnotes.xhtml_note-565){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-565
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is reincarnation in a solid
life-form? It is formed, made up of the four principal states, and
consumes solid food. What is reincarnation in a mind-made life-form? It
is formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient
in any faculty. What is reincarnation in a formless life-form? It is
formless, made of perception.

I teach the Dhamma for the giving up of reincarnation in these three
kinds of life-form. 'When you practice accordingly, corrupting qualities
will be given up in you and cleansing qualities will grow. You'll enter
and remain in the fullness and abundance of wisdom, having realized it
with your own insight in this very life.' Poṭṭhapāda, you might think:
'Corrupting qualities will be given up and cleansing qualities will
grow. One will enter and remain in the fullness and abundance of wisdom,
having realized it with one's own insight in this very life. But such a
life is
suffering.'[566](#endnotes.xhtml_note-566){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-566
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But you should not see it like this.
Corrupting qualities will be given up and cleansing qualities will grow.
One will enter and remain in the fullness and abundance of wisdom,
having realized it with one's own insight in this very life. And there
will be only joy and happiness, tranquility, mindfulness and awareness.
Such a life is blissful.

Poṭṭhapāda, if others should ask us, 'But reverends, what is that
reincarnation in a solid life-form for the giving up of which you
teach?' We'd answer like this, '*This* is that reincarnation in a solid
life-form.'

If others should ask us, 'But reverends, what is that reincarnation in a
mind-made life-form?' We'd answer like this, '*This* is that
reincarnation in a mind-made
life-form.'[567](#endnotes.xhtml_note-567){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-567
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

If others should ask us, 'But reverends, what is that reincarnation in a
formless life-form?' We'd answer like this, '*This* is that
reincarnation in a formless life-form.'

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? This being so, doesn't that statement
turn out to have a demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"Suppose a man were to build a ladder for climbing up to a stilt
longhouse right underneath that longhouse. They'd say to him, 'Mister,
that stilt longhouse that you're building a ladder for---do you know
whether it's to the north, south, east, or west? Or whether it's tall or
short or medium?' He'd say, 'This is that stilt longhouse for which I'm
building a ladder, right underneath it.'

What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? This being so, doesn't that man's
statement turn out to have a demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

When the Buddha had spoken, Citta Hatthisāriputta said, "Sir, when
reincarnated in a solid life-form, are the mind-made and formless
life-forms
fictitious,[568](#endnotes.xhtml_note-568){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-568
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and only the solid life-form real? When
reincarnated in a mind-made life-form, are the solid and formless
life-forms fictitious, and only the mind-made life-form real? When
reincarnated in a formless life-form, are the solid and mind-made
life-forms fictitious, and only the formless life-form real?"

"When reincarnated in a solid life-form, it's not referred to as a
mind-made or formless
life-form,[569](#endnotes.xhtml_note-569){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-569
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} only as a solid life-form. When
reincarnated in a mind-made life-form, it's not referred to as a solid
or formless life-form, only as a mind-made life-form. When reincarnated
in a formless life-form, it's not referred to as a solid or mind-made
life-form, only as a formless life-form.

Citta, suppose they were to ask you, 'Did you exist in the
past?[570](#endnotes.xhtml_note-570){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-570
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Will you exist in the future? Do you exist
now?' How would you answer?"

"Sir, if they were to ask me this, I'd answer like this, 'I did exist in
the past. I will exist in the future. I do exist now.' That's how I'd
answer."

"But Citta, suppose they were to ask you, 'Is the reincarnation you had
in the past your only real one, and those of the future and present
fictitious? Is the reincarnation you will have in the future your only
real one, and those of the past and present fictitious? Is the
reincarnation you have now your only real one, and those of the past and
future fictitious?' How would you answer?"

"Sir, if they were to ask me this, I'd answer like this, 'The
reincarnation I had in the past was real at that time, and those of the
future and present fictitious. The reincarnation I will have in the
future will be real at the time, and those of the past and present
fictitious. The reincarnation I have now is real at this time, and those
of the past and future fictitious.' That's how I'd answer."

"In the same way, while in any one of the three reincarnations, it's not
referred to as the other two, only under its own name.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of
these.[571](#endnotes.xhtml_note-571){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-571
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} While it's milk, it's not referred to as
curds, butter, ghee, or cream of ghee. It's only referred to as milk.
While it's curd or butter or ghee or cream of ghee, it's not referred to
as anything else, only under its own name. In the same way, while in any
one of the three reincarnations, it's not referred to as the other two,
only under its own name. These are the world's common usages, terms,
means of communication, and descriptions, which the Realized One uses to
communicate without getting stuck on
them."[572](#endnotes.xhtml_note-572){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-572
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, so
too the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge
to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this
day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

#### 2.3. The Ordination of Citta Hatthisāriputta {.subheading}

But Citta Hatthisāriputta said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, so too the Buddha
has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the
going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

And Citta Hatthisāriputta received the going forth, the ordination in
the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable Citta
Hatthisāriputta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute,
soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life.
He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[573](#endnotes.xhtml_note-573){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-573
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the
spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done;
there is nothing further for this place." And Venerable Citta
Hatthisāriputta became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="dn10">

## [DN 10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Subha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Subhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. It was not long
after the Buddha had become fully
quenched.[574](#endnotes.xhtml_note-574){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-574
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the student Subha, Todeyya's son, was residing in
Sāvatthī on some
business.[575](#endnotes.xhtml_note-575){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-575
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he addressed a certain young student,
"Here, young student, go to the ascetic Ānanda and in my name bow with
your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble,
strong, and living comfortably. And then say: 'Sir, please visit the
student Subha, Todeyya's son, at his home out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the young student, and did as he was asked.

When he had spoken, Venerable Ānanda said to him, "It's not the right
time, young student. I have drunk a dose of medicine
today.[576](#endnotes.xhtml_note-576){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-576
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But hopefully tomorrow I'll get a chance to
visit him."

"Yes, sir," replied the young student. He went back to Subha, and told
him what had happened, adding, "This much, sir, I managed to do. At
least Mister Ānanda will take the opportunity to visit tomorrow."

Then when the night had passed, Ānanda robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went with Venerable Cetaka as his second monk
to Subha's home, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then Subha went up
to Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with
him.[577](#endnotes.xhtml_note-577){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-577
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda:

"Mister Ānanda, you were Mister Gotama's attendant. You were close to
him, living in his presence. You ought to know what things Mister Gotama
praised, and in which he encouraged, settled, and grounded all these
people. What were those things?"

"Student, the Buddha praised three spectrums of practice, and that's
what he encouraged, settled, and grounded all these people in. What
three? The entire spectrum of noble ethics, immersion, and
wisdom.[578](#endnotes.xhtml_note-578){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-578
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the three spectrums of practice
that the Buddha praised."

### 1. The Entire Spectrum of Ethics {.subheading}

"But what was that entire spectrum of noble ethics that the Buddha
praised?"

"Student, it's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own
insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child,
or someone reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One
and reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. Once
they've gone forth, they live restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They act skillfully by body and speech. They're purified in livelihood
and accomplished in ethical conduct. They guard the sense doors, have
mindfulness and situational awareness, and are content.

And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a mendicant
gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword.
They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living
beings. ...

This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for
the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and
consecrating house sites, and rites involving rinsing and bathing, and
oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives,
expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye
restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery
with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines,
and binding on herbs. They refrain from such low lore, such wrong
livelihood. ... This pertains to their ethics.

A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their ethical restraint. It's like a king who has defeated
his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. A mendicant
thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to
their ethical restraint. When they have this entire spectrum of noble
ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. That's
how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.

This is that entire spectrum of noble ethics that the Buddha praised.
But there is still more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing, This entire spectrum of
noble ethics is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum
of ethics cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. Were
other ascetics and brahmins to see such an entire spectrum of noble
ethics in themselves, they'd be delighted with just that much: 'This is
sufficient; enough has been done. We've reached the goal of our ascetic
life. There is nothing more to be done.' And yet you say: 'But there is
still more to be done.'

### 2. The Spectrum of Immersion {.subheading}

But what, Mister Ānanda, was that noble spectrum of immersion that the
Buddha
praised?"[579](#endnotes.xhtml_note-579){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-579
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"And how, student, does a mendicant guard the sense doors? When a
mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they
have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss
inside themselves. That's how a mendicant guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant have mindfulness and situational awareness?
It's when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and
coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending
the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating,
drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when
walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent. That's how a mendicant has mindfulness and situational
awareness.

And how is a mendicant content? It's when a mendicant is content with
robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly.
Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. They're like a
bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. In the same way, a
mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to
look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. That's how a mendicant is content.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense
restraint, this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, and this
noble contentment, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the
root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a
forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, they return from
almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish
mindfulness in their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to work,
and his efforts proved successful. He would pay off the original loan
and have enough left over to support his partner. Thinking about this,
he'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They'd
lose their appetite and get physically weak. But after some time they'd
recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength.
Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. But after some time they were
released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. Thinking
about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master,
but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. But after some
time they'd be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not
indentured to another, an emancipated individual able to go where they
wish. Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling
along a desert road, which was perilous, with nothing to eat. But after
some time they crossed over the desert safely, arriving within a
village, a sanctuary free of peril. Thinking about this, they'd be
filled with joy and happiness.

In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up
inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a
prison, slavery, and a desert crossing.

But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a
mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from
prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at last.

Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with
rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the body that's
not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. This
pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born
of immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion.

It's like a deep lake fed by spring water. There's no inlet to the east,
west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers
from time to time. But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake
drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There's no
part of the lake that's not spread through with cool water.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. This
pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture.

It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some
of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not soaked
with cool water.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with bliss free of rapture. There's no part of the body that's not
spread with bliss free of rapture. This pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They sit
spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of
the body that's not spread with pure bright mind.

It's like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth.
There's no part of the body that's not spread over with white cloth.

In the same way, a mendicant sits spreading their body through with pure
bright mind. There\'s no part of their body that\'s not spread with pure
bright mind. This pertains to their immersion.

This is that noble spectrum of immersion that the Buddha praised. But
there is still more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing! This noble spectrum of
immersion is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum of
immersion cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. Were
other ascetics and brahmins to see such a complete spectrum of noble
immersion in themselves, they'd be delighted with just that much: 'This
is sufficient; enough has been done. We've reached the goal of our
ascetic life. There is nothing more to be done.' And yet you say: 'But
there is still more to be done.'

### 3. The Spectrum of Wisdom {.subheading}

But what, Mister Ānanda, was that spectrum of noble wisdom that the
Buddha praised?"

"When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge and
vision. They understand: 'This body of mine is formed. It's made up of
the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from
rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion,
to breaking up and destruction. And this consciousness of mine is
attached to it, tied to it.'

Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it was strung with a thread of blue,
yellow, red, white, or golden brown. And someone with clear eyes were to
take it in their hand and examine it: 'This beryl gem is naturally
beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and
unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. And it's strung with a
thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge and vision. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward the creation of a
mind-made body. From this body they create another body---formed,
mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any
faculty.

Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. They'd think:
'This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are
different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.' Or
suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. They'd
think: 'This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the
scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the
scabbard.' Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough.
They'd think: 'This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the
slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the
slough.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward the creation of a mind-made body. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward psychic power. They
wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay.
They could produce any kind of pot that they like. Or suppose a deft
ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They
could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. Or suppose a deft
goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could
produce any kind of gold item that they like.

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward psychic power. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. With
clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of
sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. Suppose there was a
person traveling along the road. They'd hear the sound of drums, clay
drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms. They'd think: 'That's the sound
of drums,' and 'that's the sound of clay drums,' and 'that's the sound
of horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward clairaudience. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward comprehending the
minds of others. They understand mind with greed as 'mind with greed',
and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'. They understand mind
with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with delusion ... mind without
delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered mind ... expansive mind ...
unexpansive mind ... mind that is not supreme ... mind that is supreme
... immersed mind ... unimmersed mind ... freed mind ... They understand
unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they'd know 'I have a
spot,' and if they had no spots they'd know 'I have no spots.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward comprehending the minds of others. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward recollection of
past lives. They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two,
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another
village. From that village they'd go to yet another village. And from
that village they'd return to their home village. They'd think: 'I went
from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat
like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village
I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like
that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I
returned to my home village.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward recollection of past lives. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the
death and rebirth of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified
and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they
chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right
view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with
clear eyes standing there might see people entering and leaving a house,
walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.
They'd think: 'These are people entering and leaving a house, walking
along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project and extend it toward
knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. This pertains to
their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the
ending of defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent,
clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank
would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of
fish swimming about or staying still. They'd think: 'This lake is
transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels,
and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying
still.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. This pertains to their
wisdom.

This is that spectrum of noble wisdom that the Buddha praised. And there
is nothing more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing! This noble spectrum of
wisdom is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum of
wisdom cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. And there
is nothing more to be done. Excellent, Mister Ānanda! Excellent! As if
he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing
out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with
clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Ānanda has made the teaching
clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching,
and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[580](#endnotes.xhtml_note-580){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-580
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Ānanda
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="dn11">

## [DN 11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kevaḍḍha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kevaṭṭasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Nāḷandā in Pāvārika's mango
grove.[581](#endnotes.xhtml_note-581){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-581
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the householder Kevaḍḍha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to
him,[582](#endnotes.xhtml_note-582){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-582
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, this Nāḷandā is successful and
prosperous, populous, full of people. Please direct a mendicant to
perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic
power.[583](#endnotes.xhtml_note-583){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-583
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Nāḷandā will become even more devoted
to the Buddha!"

When he said this, the Buddha said, "Kevaḍḍha, I do not teach Dhamma to
the mendicants like this: 'Come now, mendicants, perform a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power for the white-clothed
laypeople.'"[584](#endnotes.xhtml_note-584){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-584
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time, Kevaḍḍha made the same request, "Sir, I am not
teaching you the
Dhamma,[585](#endnotes.xhtml_note-585){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-585
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but nonetheless I say: 'Sir, this Nāḷandā
is successful and prosperous, populous, full of people. Please direct a
mendicant to perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power. Then
Nāḷandā will become even more devoted to the Buddha!'" But for a second
time, the Buddha gave the same answer.

For a third time, Kevaḍḍha made the same request, at which the Buddha
said the following.

### 1. The Demonstration of Psychic Power {.subheading}

"Kevaḍḍha, there are three kinds of demonstration, which I declare
having realized them with my own
insight.[586](#endnotes.xhtml_note-586){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-586
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What three? The demonstration of psychic
power, the demonstration of revealing, and the demonstration of
instruction.[587](#endnotes.xhtml_note-587){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-587
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the demonstration of psychic power? It's a mendicant who
wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

Someone with faith and confidence sees that mendicant performing those
superhuman feats.

They tell someone else who lacks faith and confidence: 'Oh, how
incredible, how amazing! The ascetic has such psychic power and
might\![588](#endnotes.xhtml_note-588){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-588
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I saw him myself, performing all these
superhuman feats!'

But the one lacking faith and confidence would say to
them:[589](#endnotes.xhtml_note-589){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-589
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'There's a spell named
Gandhārī.[590](#endnotes.xhtml_note-590){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-590
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Using that a mendicant can perform such
superhuman feats.'

What do you think, Kevaḍḍha? Wouldn't someone lacking faith speak like
that?"

"They would, sir."

"Seeing this drawback in psychic power, I'm horrified, repelled, and
disgusted by demonstrations of psychic
power.[591](#endnotes.xhtml_note-591){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-591
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. The Demonstration of Revealing {.subheading}

And what is the demonstration of
revealing?[592](#endnotes.xhtml_note-592){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-592
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant reveals the mind,
mentality, thoughts, and reflections of other beings and
individuals:[593](#endnotes.xhtml_note-593){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-593
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is what you're thinking, such is your
thought, and thus is your state of
mind.'[594](#endnotes.xhtml_note-594){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-594
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Someone with faith and confidence sees that mendicant revealing another
person's thoughts. They tell someone else who lacks faith and
confidence: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! The ascetic has such
psychic power and might! I saw him myself, revealing the thoughts of
another person!'

But the one lacking faith and confidence would say to them: 'There's a
spell named
Māṇikā.[595](#endnotes.xhtml_note-595){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-595
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Using that a mendicant can reveal another
person's thoughts.'

What do you think, Kevaḍḍha? Wouldn't someone lacking faith speak like
that?"

"They would, sir."

"Seeing this drawback in revealing, I'm horrified, repelled, and
disgusted by demonstrations of revealing.

### 3. The Demonstration of Instruction {.subheading}

And what is the demonstration of instruction? It's when a mendicant
instructs others like this: 'Think like this, not like that. Focus your
mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved
that.' This is called the demonstration of instruction.

Furthermore, a Realized One arises in the world ... That's how a
mendicant is accomplished in ethics. ... They enter and remain in the
first absorption ... This is called the demonstration of instruction.

They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. This too is called the demonstration of instruction.

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision ... This
too is called the demonstration of instruction.

They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.' This too
is called the demonstration of instruction.

These, Kevaḍḍha, are the three kinds of demonstration, which I declare
having realized them with my own insight.

### 4. On the Mendicant in Search of the Cessation of Being {.subheading}

Once upon a time, Kevaḍḍha, a mendicant in this very Saṅgha had the
following
thought,[596](#endnotes.xhtml_note-596){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-596
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Where do these four principal states cease
without anything left over, namely, the elements of earth, water, fire,
and
air?'[597](#endnotes.xhtml_note-597){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-597
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then that mendicant attained a state of immersion such that a path to
the gods
appeared.[598](#endnotes.xhtml_note-598){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-598
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he approached the gods of the four
great kings and
said,[599](#endnotes.xhtml_note-599){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-599
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverends, where do these four principal
states cease without anything left over, namely, the elements of earth,
water, fire, and air?'

When he said this, those gods said to him, 'Mendicant, we too do not
know this. But the four great kings are our
superiors.[600](#endnotes.xhtml_note-600){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-600
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They might know.'

Then he approached the four great kings and asked the same question. But
they also said to him, 'Mendicant, we too do not know this. But the gods
of the thirty-three
...[601](#endnotes.xhtml_note-601){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-601
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sakka, lord of gods
...[602](#endnotes.xhtml_note-602){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-602
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of Yama
...[603](#endnotes.xhtml_note-603){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-603
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the god named Suyāma ... the Joyful gods
... the god named Santussita ... the gods who love to imagine ... the
god named Sunimmita ... the gods who control the creation of others ...
the god named Vasavattī ... the gods of the Divinity's host are our
superiors. They might know.'

Then that mendicant attained a state of immersion such that a path to
divinity appeared. Then he approached the gods of the Divinity's host
and said, 'Reverends, where do these four principal states cease without
anything left over, namely, the elements of earth, water, fire, and
air?' But they also said to him, 'Mendicant, we too do not know
this.[604](#endnotes.xhtml_note-604){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-604
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But there is the Divinity, the Great
Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the
Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the
Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and
those yet to be born. He is our
superior.[605](#endnotes.xhtml_note-605){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-605
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He might
know.'[606](#endnotes.xhtml_note-606){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-606
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But reverends, where is that Divinity now?' 'We also don't know where
he is or what way he lies. But by the signs that are seen---light
arising and radiance appearing---we know that Divinity will appear. For
this is the precursor for the appearance of the Divinity, namely light
arising and radiance
appearing.'[607](#endnotes.xhtml_note-607){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-607
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Not long afterwards, the Great Divinity
appeared.

Then that mendicant approached the Great Divinity and said to him,
'Reverend, where do these four principal states cease without anything
left over, namely, the elements of earth, water, fire, and air?' The
Great Divinity said to him, 'I am the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the
Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power,
God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born.'[608](#endnotes.xhtml_note-608){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-608
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time, that mendicant said to the Great Divinity, 'Reverend,
I am not asking you whether you
are[609](#endnotes.xhtml_note-609){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-609
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the
Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power,
God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born. I am asking where these four principal states cease without
anything left over.'

For a second time, the Great Divinity said to him, 'I am the Divinity,
the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal
Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the
First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been
born and those yet to be born.' For a third time, that mendicant said to
the Great
Divinity,[610](#endnotes.xhtml_note-610){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-610
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend, I am not asking you whether you
are the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished,
the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the
Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those
who have been born and those yet to be born. I am asking where these
four principal states cease without anything left over.'

Then the Great Divinity took that mendicant by the arm, led him off to
one side, and said to
him,[611](#endnotes.xhtml_note-611){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-611
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Mendicant, these gods think that there is
nothing at all that I don't know and see and understand and realize.
That's why I didn't answer in front of them. But I too do not know where
these four principal states cease with nothing left
over.[612](#endnotes.xhtml_note-612){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-612
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Therefore, mendicant, the misdeed is yours
alone, the mistake is yours alone, in that you passed over the Buddha
and searched elsewhere for an answer to this question. Mendicant, go to
the Buddha and ask him this question. You should remember it in line
with his answer.'

Then that mendicant, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared
in front of me. Then he bowed, sat down to one side, and said to me,
'Sir, where do these four principal states cease without anything left
over, namely, the elements of earth, water, fire, and air?'

#### 4.1. The Simile of the Land-Spotting Bird {.subheading}

When he said this, I said to him:

'Once upon a time, mendicant, some sea-merchants set sail for the ocean
deeps, taking with them a land-spotting bird. When their ship was out of
sight of land, they released the bird. It flew right away to the east,
the west, the north, the south, upwards, and in-between. If it saw land
on any side, it went there and stayed. But if it saw no land on any side
it returned to the ship.

In the same way, after failing to get an answer to this question even
after searching as far as the realm of divinity, you've returned to me.
Mendicant, this is not how the question should be asked: "Sir, where do
these four principal states cease without anything left over, namely,
the elements of earth, water, fire, and air?"

This is how the question should be
asked:[613](#endnotes.xhtml_note-613){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-613
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "Where do water and
> earth,[614](#endnotes.xhtml_note-614){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-614
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> fire and air find no footing?\
> Where do long and
> short,[615](#endnotes.xhtml_note-615){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-615
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> fine and coarse, beautiful and
> ugly;[616](#endnotes.xhtml_note-616){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-616
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> where do name and form\
> cease with nothing left over?"

And the answer to that is:

> "Consciousness where nothing
> appears,[617](#endnotes.xhtml_note-617){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-617
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> infinite, luminous
> all-round---[618](#endnotes.xhtml_note-618){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-618
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> that's where water and earth,\
> fire and air find no
> footing.[619](#endnotes.xhtml_note-619){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-619
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> And that is where long and short,\
> fine and coarse, beautiful and ugly;\
> that's where name and form\
> cease with nothing left over---\
> with the cessation of
> consciousness,[620](#endnotes.xhtml_note-620){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-620
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> that's where they cease."'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the householder Kevaḍḍha
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn12">

## [DN 12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Lohicca ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lohiccasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants when he arrived at
Sālavatikā.[621](#endnotes.xhtml_note-621){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-621
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Lohicca was living in Sālavatikā. It was a
crown property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala, teeming with living
creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park endowed to
a
brahmin.[622](#endnotes.xhtml_note-622){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-622
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Lohicca had the following harmful misconception:
"Should an ascetic or brahmin achieve some skillful quality, they ought
not inform anyone else. For what can one person do for
another?[623](#endnotes.xhtml_note-623){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-623
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only
to create another new bond. That's the consequence of such a wicked,
greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?"

Lohicca heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Sālavatikā, together with a large Saṅgha of five
hundred mendicants. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then Lohicca addressed his barber
Rosika,[624](#endnotes.xhtml_note-624){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-624
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Here, dear Rosika, go to the ascetic
Gotama and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is
healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then ask
him whether he, together with the mendicant Saṅgha, might please accept
tomorrow's meal from the brahmin
Lohicca."[625](#endnotes.xhtml_note-625){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-625
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Rosika replied. He did as he was asked, and the Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Rosika got up from his
seat, went to Lohicca, and said to him, "I gave the Buddha your message,
and he accepted."

And when the night had passed Lohicca had delicious fresh and cooked
foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the
time, saying, "Here, dear Rosika, go to the ascetic Gotama and announce
the time, saying: 'It's time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready.'"

"Yes, sir," Rosika replied. He did as he was asked.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to Sālavatikā together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Now, Rosika
was following behind the Buddha, and told him of Lohicca's views,
adding, "Sir, please dissuade him from that harmful
misconception."[626](#endnotes.xhtml_note-626){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-626
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Hopefully that'll happen, Rosika, hopefully that'll
happen."[627](#endnotes.xhtml_note-627){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-627
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha approached Lohicca's home, where he sat on the seat
spread out. Then Lohicca served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha
headed by the Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked
foods.

### 1. Questioning Lohicca {.subheading}

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Lohicca took a
low seat and sat to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "Is it really true, Lohicca, that you have such
a harmful
misconception:[628](#endnotes.xhtml_note-628){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-628
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Should an ascetic or brahmin achieve some
skillful quality, they ought not inform anyone else. For what can one
person do for another? Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to
create another new bond. That's the consequence of such a wicked, greedy
deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?'"

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Lohicca? Do you reside in Sālavatikā?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"Lohicca, suppose someone were to say: 'The brahmin Lohicca resides in
Sālavatikā. He alone should enjoy the revenues produced in Sālavatikā
and not share them with anyone else.' Would the person who spoke like
that make it difficult for those whose living depends on you or not?"

"They would, Mister Gotama."

"But is someone who creates difficulties for others acting kindly or
unkindly?"

"Unkindly, sir."

"But does an unkind person have love in their heart or hostility?"

"Hostility, sir."

"And when the heart is full of hostility, is there right view or wrong
view?"

"Wrong view, Mister Gotama."

"An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:
hell or the animal realm.

What do you think, Lohicca? Does King Pasenadi reign over Kāsi and
Kosala?"[629](#endnotes.xhtml_note-629){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-629
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"Lohicca, suppose someone were to say: 'King Pasenadi reigns over Kāsi
and Kosala. He alone should enjoy the revenues produced in Kāsi and
Kosala and not share them with anyone else.' Would the person who spoke
like that make it difficult for yourself and others whose living depends
on King Pasenadi or not?"

"They would, Mister Gotama."

"But is someone who creates difficulties for others acting kindly or
unkindly?"

"Unkindly, sir."

"But does an unkind person have love in their heart or hostility?"

"Hostility, sir."

"And when the heart is full of hostility, is there right view or wrong
view?"

"Wrong view, Mister Gotama."

"An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:
hell or the animal realm.

So it seems, Lohicca, that should someone say such a thing either of
Lohicca or of King Pasenadi, that is wrong view.

In the same way, suppose someone were to say: 'Should an ascetic or
brahmin achieve some skillful quality, they ought not inform anyone
else. For what can one person do for another? Suppose someone cut off an
old bond, only to create another new bond. That's the consequence of
such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for
another?'

Now, there are gentlemen who, relying on the teaching and training
proclaimed by the Realized One, achieve a high distinction such as the
following: they realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of
once-return, the fruit of non-return, or perfection. And in addition,
there are those who ripen the seeds for rebirth in a heavenly state. The
person who spoke like that makes it difficult for them. They're acting
unkindly, their heart is full of hostility, and they have wrong
view.[630](#endnotes.xhtml_note-630){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-630
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} An individual with wrong view is reborn in
one of two places, I say: hell or the animal realm.

### 2. Three Teachers Who Deserve to Be Reprimanded {.subheading}

Lohicca, there are three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to
be
reprimanded.[631](#endnotes.xhtml_note-631){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-631
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When someone reprimands such teachers, the
reprimand is true, correct, legitimate, and blameless. What three?

Firstly, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic life
for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. They teach
their disciples: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.'
But their disciples don't want to listen. They don't actively listen or
try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher's
instruction. That teacher deserves to be reprimanded: 'Venerable, you
haven't reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when you teach
disciples they proceed having turned away from the teacher's
instruction. It's like a man who makes advances on a woman though she
pulls away, or embraces her though she turns her
back.[632](#endnotes.xhtml_note-632){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-632
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the consequence of such a wicked,
greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?' This is the first
kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

Furthermore, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic
life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. They
teach their disciples: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your
happiness.' Their disciples do want to listen. They actively listen and
try to understand. They don't proceed having turned away from the
teacher's
instruction.[633](#endnotes.xhtml_note-633){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-633
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That teacher deserves to be reprimanded:
'Venerable, you haven't reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when
you teach disciples they don't proceed having turned away from the
teacher's instruction. It's like someone who abandons their own field
and presumes to weed someone else's field. That's the consequence of
such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?'
This is the second kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

Furthermore, take a teacher who has reached the goal of the ascetic life
for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. They teach
their disciples: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.'
But their disciples don't want to listen. They don't actively listen or
try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher's
instruction. That teacher deserves to be reprimanded: 'Venerable, you
have reached the goal of the ascetic life; yet when you teach disciples
they proceed having turned away from the teacher's instruction. Suppose
someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new
bond.[634](#endnotes.xhtml_note-634){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-634
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the consequence of such a wicked,
greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?' This is the
third kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

These are the three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to be
reprimanded. When someone reprimands such teachers, the reprimand is
true, correct, legitimate, and blameless."

### 3. A Teacher Who Does Not Deserve to Be Reprimanded {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha, "But Mister Gotama, is
there a teacher in the world who does not deserve to be
reprimanded?"[635](#endnotes.xhtml_note-635){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-635
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There is,
Lohicca."[636](#endnotes.xhtml_note-636){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-636
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But who is that teacher?"

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
... They enter and remain in the first absorption ... A teacher under
whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not
deserve to be reprimanded. When someone reprimands such a teacher, the
reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and blameworthy.

They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high
distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. ...

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision ... A
teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one
who does not deserve to be reprimanded. ...

They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.' A
teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one
who does not deserve to be reprimanded. When someone reprimands such a
teacher, the reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and
blameworthy."

When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha:

"Suppose, Mister Gotama, a person was falling over a cliff, and another
person were to grab them by the hair, pull them up, and place them on
firm
ground.[637](#endnotes.xhtml_note-637){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-637
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, when I was falling off a
cliff Mister Gotama pulled me up and placed me on safe ground.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="dn13">

## [DN 13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Experts in the Three Vedas ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tevijjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Manasākaṭa.[638](#endnotes.xhtml_note-638){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-638
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He stayed in a mango grove on a bank of the
river Aciravatī to the north of
Manasākaṭa.[639](#endnotes.xhtml_note-639){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-639
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time several very well-known well-to-do brahmins were
residing in Manasākaṭa. They included the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha,
Pokkharasāti, Jānussoṇi, Todeyya, and others.

Then as the students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were going for a walk they
began a discussion regarding what is the path and what is not the
path.[640](#endnotes.xhtml_note-640){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-640
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Vāseṭṭha said this: "This is the only straight path, the direct route
that delivers one who practices it to the company of Divinity; namely,
that explained by the brahmin
Pokkharasāti."[641](#endnotes.xhtml_note-641){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-641
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Bhāradvāja said this: "This is the only straight path, the direct route
that delivers one who practices it to the company of Divinity; namely,
that explained by the brahmin
Tārukkha."[642](#endnotes.xhtml_note-642){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-642
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But neither was able to persuade the other. So Vāseṭṭha said to
Bhāradvāja, "Bhāradvāja, the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from
a Sakyan family---is staying in a mango grove on a bank of the river
Aciravatī to the north of Manasākaṭa. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
Come, let's go to see him and ask him about this matter. As he answers,
so we'll remember it."

"Yes, sir," replied Bhāradvāja.

### 1. What is the Path and What is Not the Path {.subheading}

So they went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side
and Vāseṭṭha told him of their conversation, adding: "In this matter we
have a dispute, a disagreement, a difference of opinion."

"So, Vāseṭṭha, it seems that you say that the straight path is that
explained by Pokkharasāti, while Bhāradvāja says that the straight path
is that explained by Tārukkha. But what exactly is your disagreement
about?"

"About what is the path and what is not the path, Mister Gotama. Even
though brahmins describe different paths---the Adhvaryu brahmins, the
Taittirīya brahmins, the Chāndogya brahmins, the Cāndrāyaṇa brahmins,
and the Bahvṛca brahmins---all of them still lead someone who practices
them to the company of
Divinity.[643](#endnotes.xhtml_note-643){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-643
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like a village or town that has many different roads nearby, yet
all of them meet at that
village.[644](#endnotes.xhtml_note-644){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-644
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, even though brahmins
describe different paths---the Adhvaryu brahmins, the Taittirīya
brahmins, the Chāndogya brahmins, the Cāndrāyaṇa brahmins, and the
Bahvṛca brahmins---all of them still lead someone who practices them to
the company of Divinity."

### 2. Questioning Vāseṭṭha {.subheading}

"Do you say, 'they lead someone', Vāseṭṭha?"

"I do, Mister Gotama."

"Do you say, 'they lead someone', Vāseṭṭha?"

"I do, Mister Gotama."

"Do you say, 'they lead someone', Vāseṭṭha?"

"I do, Mister Gotama."

"Well, of the brahmins who are proficient in the three Vedas, Vāseṭṭha,
is there even a single one who has seen the Divinity with their own
eyes?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, has even a single one of their tutors seen the Divinity with
their own eyes?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, has even a single one of their tutors' tutors seen the Divinity
with their own eyes?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, has anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors seen the
Divinity with their own eyes?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, what of the ancient seers of the brahmins proficient in the three
Vedas, namely Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi,
Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu? They were the
authors and propagators of the hymns. Their hymnal was sung and
propagated and compiled in ancient times; and these days, brahmins
continue to sing and chant it, chanting what was chanted and teaching
what was
taught.[645](#endnotes.xhtml_note-645){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-645
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Did they say: 'We know and see where the
Divinity is or what way he
lies'?"[646](#endnotes.xhtml_note-646){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-646
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So it seems that none of those brahmins have seen the Divinity with
their own eyes, and not even the ancient seers claimed to know where he
is. Yet the brahmins proficient in the three Vedas say: 'We teach the
path to the company of that which we neither know nor see. This is the
only straight path, the direct route that delivers one who practices it
to the company of Divinity.'

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? This being so, doesn't their statement turn
out to have no demonstrable
basis?"[647](#endnotes.xhtml_note-647){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-647
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha. For it is impossible that they should teach the path to
that which they neither know nor see.

Suppose there was a queue of blind men, each holding the one in front:
the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last
one does not
see.[648](#endnotes.xhtml_note-648){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-648
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, it seems to me that the
brahmins' statement turns out to be comparable to a queue of blind men:
the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last
one does not see. Their statement turns out to be a joke---mere words,
vacuous and hollow.

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Do the brahmins proficient in the three
Vedas see the sun and moon just as other folk do? And do they pray to
them and exalt them, following their course from where they rise to
where they set with joined palms held in
worship?"[649](#endnotes.xhtml_note-649){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-649
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Though this is so, are the brahmins
proficient in the three Vedas able to teach the path to the company of
the sun and moon, saying: 'This is the only straight path, the direct
route that delivers one who practices it to the company of the sun and
moon'?"[650](#endnotes.xhtml_note-650){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-650
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So it seems that even though the brahmins proficient in the three Vedas
see the sun and moon, they are not able to teach the path to the company
of the sun and moon.

But it seems that even though they have not seen the Divinity with their
own eyes, they still claim to teach the path to the company of that
which they neither know nor see.

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? This being so, doesn't their statement turn
out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha. For it is impossible that they should teach the path to
that which they neither know nor see.

#### 2.1. The Simile of the Finest Lady in the Land {.subheading}

Suppose a man were to say, 'Whoever the finest lady in the land is, it
is her that I want, her that I desire!'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know whether she's an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant,
or a menial?' Asked this, he'd say, 'No.'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know her name or clan? Whether she's tall or short or
medium? Whether her skin is black, brown, or tawny? What village, town,
or city she comes from?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'No.'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, do you desire someone who you've never even
known or seen?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? This being so, doesn't that man's statement
turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, doesn't the statement of those brahmins turn out to
have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha. For it is impossible that they should teach the path to
that which they neither know nor see.

#### 2.2. The Simile of the Ladder {.subheading}

Suppose a man was to build a ladder at the crossroads for climbing up to
a stilt longhouse.

They'd say to him, 'Mister, that stilt longhouse that you're building a
ladder for---do you know whether it's to the north, south, east, or
west? Or whether it's tall or short or medium?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'No.'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, are you building a ladder for a longhouse
that you've never even known or seen?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? This being so, doesn't that man's statement
turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, doesn't the statement of those brahmins turn out to
have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha. For it is impossible that they should teach the path to
that which they neither know nor see.

#### 2.3. The Simile of the River Aciravatī {.subheading}

Suppose the river Aciravatī was full to the brim so a crow could drink
from it. Then along comes a person who wants to cross over to the far
shore. Standing on the near shore, they'd call out to the far shore,
'Come here, far shore! Come here, far shore!'

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Would the far shore of the Aciravatī river
come over to the near shore because of that man's call, request, desire,
or expectation?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, Vāseṭṭha, the brahmins proficient in the three Vedas
proceed having given up those things that make one a true brahmin, and
having undertaken those things that make one not a true brahmin. Yet
they
say:[651](#endnotes.xhtml_note-651){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-651
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'We call upon Indra! We call upon Soma! We
call upon Varuṇa! We call upon Īsāna! We call upon the Progenitor! We
call upon the Divinity! We call upon Mahinda! We call upon
Yama!'[652](#endnotes.xhtml_note-652){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-652
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So long as they proceed in this way it's impossible that they will, when
the body breaks up, after death, be reborn in the company of Divinity.

Suppose the river Aciravatī was full to the brim so a crow could drink
from it. Then along comes a person who wants to cross over to the far
shore. But while still on the near shore, their arms are tied tightly
behind their back with a strong chain.

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Could that person cross over to the far
shore?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, the five kinds of sensual stimulation are called
'chains' and 'fetters' in the training of the Noble One. What five?
Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing.

These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation that are called 'chains'
and 'fetters' in the training of the Noble One. The brahmins proficient
in the three Vedas enjoy these five kinds of sensual stimulation tied,
infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the
escape. So long as they enjoy them it's impossible that they will, when
the body breaks up, after death, be reborn in the company of Divinity.

Suppose the river Aciravatī was full to the brim so a crow could drink
from it. Then along comes a person who wants to cross over to the far
shore. But they'd lie down wrapped in cloth from head to foot.

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Could that person cross over to the far
shore?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, the five hindrances are called 'obstacles' and
'hindrances' and 'encasings' and 'shrouds' in the training of the Noble
One. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These five hindrances
are called 'obstacles' and 'hindrances' and 'encasings' and 'shrouds' in
the training of the Noble One.

The brahmins proficient in the three Vedas are obstructed, hindered,
encased, and shrouded by these five hindrances. So long as they are so
obstructed it's impossible that they will, when the body breaks up,
after death, be reborn in the company of Divinity.

### 3. Converging {.subheading}

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Have you heard that the brahmins who are
elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, say whether the Divinity is
encumbered with possessions or not?"

"That he is not, Mister Gotama."

"Is his heart full of enmity or not?"

"It is not."

"Is his heart full of ill will or not?"

"It is not."

"Is his heart corrupted or not?"

"It is not."

"Does he wield power or not?"

"He does."

"What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Are the brahmins proficient in the three
Vedas encumbered with possessions or not?"

"They are."

"Are their hearts full of enmity or not?"

"They are."

"Are their hearts full of ill will or not?"

"They are."

"Are their hearts corrupted or not?"

"They are."

"Do they wield power or not?"

"They do not."

"So it seems that the brahmins proficient in the three Vedas are
encumbered with possessions, but the Divinity is not. But would brahmins
who are encumbered with possessions come together and converge with the
Divinity, who isn't encumbered with possessions?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha! It's impossible that the brahmins who are encumbered
with possessions will, when the body breaks up, after death, be reborn
in the company of Divinity, who isn't encumbered with possessions.

And it seems that the brahmins have enmity, ill will, corruption, and do
not wield power, while the Divinity is the opposite in all these things.
But would brahmins who are opposite to the Divinity in all things come
together and converge with him?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha! It's impossible that such brahmins will, when the body
breaks up, after death, be reborn in the company of Divinity.

But here the brahmins proficient in the three Vedas sink down where they
have sat, only to drift apart, while imagining they're crossing over to
drier
ground.[653](#endnotes.xhtml_note-653){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-653
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why the three Vedas of the brahmins
are called a 'salted land' and a 'barren land' and a 'disaster'."

When he said this, Vāseṭṭha said to the Buddha, "I have heard, Mister
Gotama, that you know the path to company with Divinity."

"What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Is the village of Manasākaṭa nearby?"

"Yes it is."

"What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? Suppose a person was born and raised in
Manasākaṭa. And as soon as they left the town some people asked them for
the road to Manasākaṭa. Would they be slow or hesitant to answer?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because they were born and raised in
Manasākaṭa. They're well acquainted with all the roads to the village."

"Still, it's possible they might be slow or hesitant to answer. But the
Realized One is never slow or hesitant when questioned about the realm
of divinity or the practice that leads to the realm of divinity. I
understand the Divinity, the realm of divinity, and the practice that
leads to the realm of divinity, practicing in accordance with which one
is reborn in the realm of divinity."

When he said this, Vāseṭṭha said to the Buddha, "I have heard, Mister
Gotama, that you teach the path to company with
Divinity.[654](#endnotes.xhtml_note-654){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-654
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please teach us that path and elevate this
generation of brahmins."

"Well then, Vāseṭṭha, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Vāseṭṭha.

### 4. Teaching the Path to the Divinity {.subheading}

The Buddha said this:

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
... Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs
up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture,
the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss.
And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.

They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill
will.[655](#endnotes.xhtml_note-655){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-655
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They'd easily make themselves
heard in the four quarters. In the same way, when the heart's release by
love has been developed like this, any limited deeds they've done don't
remain or persist
there.[656](#endnotes.xhtml_note-656){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-656
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is a path to company with Divinity.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
...[657](#endnotes.xhtml_note-657){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-657
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing
...[658](#endnotes.xhtml_note-658){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-658
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill
will.[659](#endnotes.xhtml_note-659){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-659
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They'd easily make themselves
heard in the four quarters. In the same way, when the heart's release by
equanimity has been developed and cultivated like this, any limited
deeds they've done don't remain or persist there. This too is a path to
company with
Divinity.[660](#endnotes.xhtml_note-660){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-660
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, Vāseṭṭha? When a mendicant meditates like this, are
they encumbered with possessions or not?"

"They are not."

"Is their heart full of enmity or not?"

"It is not."

"Is their heart full of ill will or not?"

"It is not."

"Is their heart corrupted or not?"

"It is not."

"Do they wield power or not?"

"They do."

"So it seems that that mendicant is not encumbered with possessions, and
neither is the Divinity. Would a mendicant who is not encumbered with
possessions come together and converge with the Divinity, who isn't
encumbered with possessions?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha! It's quite possible that a mendicant who is not
encumbered with possessions will, when the body breaks up, after death,
be reborn in the company of Divinity, who isn't encumbered with
possessions.

And it seems that that mendicant has no enmity, ill will, corruption,
and does wield power, while the Divinity is the same in all these
things. Would a mendicant who is the same as the Divinity in all things
come together and converge with him?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Vāseṭṭha! It's quite possible that that mendicant will, when the
body breaks up, after death, be reborn in the company of
Divinity."[661](#endnotes.xhtml_note-661){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-661
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja said to him, "Excellent,
Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We go for refuge
to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[662](#endnotes.xhtml_note-662){#dn-silakkhandhavagga.xhtml_noteref-662
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#dn-mahavagga.xhtml}

# The Great Chapter {#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_dn-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="dn14">

## [DN 14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Traces Left Behind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāpadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. On Past Lives {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[663](#endnotes.xhtml_note-663){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-663
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery, in the hut by
the kareri
tree.[664](#endnotes.xhtml_note-664){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-664
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat
together in the pavilion by the kareri tree and this Dhamma talk on the
subject of past lives came up among them, "So it was in a past life;
such it was in a past
life."[665](#endnotes.xhtml_note-665){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-665
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
that discussion among the mendicants. So he got up from his seat and
went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed
the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just
now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, "This is the
conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"Would you like to hear a Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
give a Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives. The mendicants will
listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ninety-one eons ago, the Buddha Vipassī arose in the world, perfected
and fully
awakened.[666](#endnotes.xhtml_note-666){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-666
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thirty-one eons ago, the Buddha Sikhī arose
in the world, perfected and fully
awakened.[667](#endnotes.xhtml_note-667){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-667
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same thirty-first eon, the Buddha
Vessabhū arose in the world, perfected and fully
awakened.[668](#endnotes.xhtml_note-668){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-668
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the present fortunate eon, the Buddhas
Kakusandha,[669](#endnotes.xhtml_note-669){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-669
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Koṇāgamana,[670](#endnotes.xhtml_note-670){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-670
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and Kassapa arose in the world, perfected
and fully
awakened.[671](#endnotes.xhtml_note-671){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-671
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And in the present fortunate eon, I have
arisen in the world, perfected and fully
awakened.[672](#endnotes.xhtml_note-672){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-672
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Buddhas Vipassī, Sikhī, and Vessabhū were born as aristocrats into
aristocrat families. The Buddhas Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, and Kassapa
were born as brahmins into brahmin families. I was born as an aristocrat
into an aristocrat
family.[673](#endnotes.xhtml_note-673){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-673
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Koṇḍañña was the clan of
Vipassī,[674](#endnotes.xhtml_note-674){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-674
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sikhī, and Vessabhū. Kassapa was the clan
of Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, and Kassapa. Gotama is my
clan.[675](#endnotes.xhtml_note-675){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-675
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For Vipassī, the life-span was 80,000 years. For Sikhī, the life-span
was 70,000 years. For Vessabhū, the life-span was 60,000 years. For
Kakusandha, the life-span was 40,000 years. For Koṇāgamana, the
life-span was 30,000 years. For Kassapa, the life-span was 20,000 years.
For me at this time the life-span is short, brief, and fleeting. A
long-lived person lives for a century or a little more.

Vipassī was awakened at the root of a patala
tree.[676](#endnotes.xhtml_note-676){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-676
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sikhī was awakened at the root of a
white-mango
tree.[677](#endnotes.xhtml_note-677){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-677
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Vessabhū was awakened at the root of a sal
tree.[678](#endnotes.xhtml_note-678){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-678
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Kakusandha was awakened at the root of a
sirisa
tree.[679](#endnotes.xhtml_note-679){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-679
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Koṇāgamana was awakened at the root of a
cluster fig
tree.[680](#endnotes.xhtml_note-680){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-680
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Kassapa was awakened at the root of a
banyan
tree.[681](#endnotes.xhtml_note-681){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-681
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I was awakened at the root of a peepal
tree.[682](#endnotes.xhtml_note-682){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-682
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Vipassī had a fine pair of chief disciples named Khaṇḍa and Tissa. Sikhī
had a fine pair of chief disciples named Abhibhū and Sambhava. Vessabhū
had a fine pair of chief disciples named Soṇa and Uttara. Kakusandha had
a fine pair of chief disciples named Vidhura and Sañjīva. Koṇāgamana had
a fine pair of chief disciples named Bhiyyosa and Uttara. Kassapa had a
fine pair of chief disciples named Tissa and Bhāradvāja. I have a fine
pair of chief disciples named Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

Vipassī had three gatherings of disciples---one of 6,800,000, one of
100,000, and one of 80,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their
defilements.[683](#endnotes.xhtml_note-683){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-683
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Sikhī had three gatherings of disciples---one of 100,000, one of 80,000,
and one of 70,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their
defilements.

Vessabhū had three gatherings of disciples---one of 80,000, one of
70,000, and one of 60,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their
defilements.

Kakusandha had one gathering of disciples---40,000 mendicants who had
ended their defilements.

Koṇāgamana had one gathering of disciples---30,000 mendicants who had
ended their defilements.

Kassapa had one gathering of disciples---20,000 mendicants who had ended
their defilements.

I have had one gathering of disciples---1,250 mendicants who had ended
their
defilements.[684](#endnotes.xhtml_note-684){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-684
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Vipassī had as chief attendant a mendicant named Asoka. Sikhī had as
chief attendant a mendicant named Khemaṅkara. Vessabhū had as chief
attendant a mendicant named Upasanta. Kakusandha had as chief attendant
a mendicant named Buddhija. Koṇāgamana had as chief attendant a
mendicant named Sotthija. Kassapa had as chief attendant a mendicant
named Sabbamitta. I have as chief attendant a mendicant named Ānanda.

Vipassī's father was King Bandhumā, his birth mother was Queen
Bandhumatī, and their capital city was named Bandhumatī.

Sikhī's father was King
Aruṇa,[685](#endnotes.xhtml_note-685){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-685
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} his birth mother was Queen
Pabhāvatī,[686](#endnotes.xhtml_note-686){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-686
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and their capital city was named
Aruṇavatī.[687](#endnotes.xhtml_note-687){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-687
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Vessabhū's father was King
Suppatita,[688](#endnotes.xhtml_note-688){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-688
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} his birth mother was Queen Vassavatī, and
their capital city was named Anoma.

Kakusandha's father was the brahmin
Aggidatta,[689](#endnotes.xhtml_note-689){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-689
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and his birth mother was the brahmin lady
Visākhā.[690](#endnotes.xhtml_note-690){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-690
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time the king was Khema, whose
capital city was named
Khemavatī.[691](#endnotes.xhtml_note-691){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-691
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Koṇāgamana's father was the brahmin
Yaññadatta,[692](#endnotes.xhtml_note-692){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-692
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and his birth mother was the brahmin lady
Uttarā.[693](#endnotes.xhtml_note-693){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-693
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time the king was Sobha, whose
capital city was named
Sobhavatī.[694](#endnotes.xhtml_note-694){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-694
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Kassapa's father was the brahmin
Brahmadatta,[695](#endnotes.xhtml_note-695){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-695
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and his birth mother was the brahmin lady
Dhanavatī.[696](#endnotes.xhtml_note-696){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-696
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time the king was
Kikī,[697](#endnotes.xhtml_note-697){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-697
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whose capital city was named Varanasi.

In this life, my father was King
Suddhodana,[698](#endnotes.xhtml_note-698){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-698
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} my birth mother was Queen
Māyā,[699](#endnotes.xhtml_note-699){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-699
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and our capital city was Kapilavatthu."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants discussed among themselves:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! The Realized One has such
psychic power and might! For he is able to recollect the birth, names,
clans, life-span, chief disciples, and gatherings of disciples of the
Buddhas of the past who have become fully quenched, cut off
proliferation, cut off the track, finished off the cycle, and
transcended all suffering. He knows their birth, names, clans, conduct,
qualities, wisdom, meditation, and freedom.

Is it because the Realized One has clearly comprehended the principle of
the teachings that he can recollect all these
things?[700](#endnotes.xhtml_note-700){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-700
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or did deities tell him?" But this
conversation among those mendicants was left unfinished.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the pavilion by the kareri tree, where he sat on the seat spread out and
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking
about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, "This was our
conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"It is because the Realized One has clearly comprehended the principle
of the teachings that he can recollect all these things. And the deities
also told me.

Would you like to hear a further Dhamma talk on the subject of past
lives?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
give a further Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ninety-one eons ago, the Buddha Vipassī arose in the world, perfected
and fully awakened. He was born as an aristocrat into an aristocrat
family. His clan was Koṇḍañña. He lived for 80,000 years. He was
awakened at the root of a patala tree. He had a fine pair of chief
disciples named Khaṇḍa and Tissa. He had three gatherings of
disciples---one of 6,800,000, one of 100,000, and one of 80,000---all of
them mendicants who had ended their defilements. He had as chief
attendant a mendicant named Asoka. His father was King Bandhumā, his
birth mother was Queen Bandhumatī, and their capital city was named
Bandhumatī.

### 2. What's Normal For One Intent on Awakening {.subheading}

When Vipassī, the being intent on awakening, passed away from the host
of joyful gods, he was conceived in his mother's womb, mindful and
aware.[701](#endnotes.xhtml_note-701){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-701
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a
case.[702](#endnotes.xhtml_note-702){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-702
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening passes away from
the host of joyful gods, he is conceived in his mother's womb. And
then---in this world with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---an
immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the glory of the
gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so utterly dark
that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful,
makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears,
surpassing the glory of the
gods.[703](#endnotes.xhtml_note-703){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-703
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the sentient beings reborn there
recognize each other by that light: 'So, it seems other sentient beings
have been reborn
here!'[704](#endnotes.xhtml_note-704){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-704
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this ten-thousandfold galaxy shakes and
rocks and trembles. And an immeasurable, magnificent light appears in
the world, surpassing the glory of the gods. This is normal in such a
case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, four gods approach to guard the four quarters, so that
no human or non-human or anyone at all shall harm the being intent on
awakening or his
mother.[705](#endnotes.xhtml_note-705){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-705
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she becomes naturally ethical. She refrains from killing
living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and beer, wine,
and liquor
intoxicants.[706](#endnotes.xhtml_note-706){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-706
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she no longer feels sexual desire for men, and she
cannot be violated by a man of lustful intent. This is normal in such a
case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she obtains the five kinds of sensual stimulation and
amuses herself, supplied and provided with
them.[707](#endnotes.xhtml_note-707){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-707
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, no afflictions beset her. She's happy and free of bodily
fatigue. And she sees the being intent on awakening in her womb, whole
in his major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. Suppose
there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted,
well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good
qualities. And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white,
or golden brown. And someone with clear eyes were to take it in their
hand and examine it: 'This beryl gem is naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it's strung with a thread of blue, yellow,
red, white, or golden brown.'

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, no afflictions beset her. She's happy and free of bodily
fatigue. And she sees the being intent on awakening in her womb, whole
in his major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. This is
normal in such a case.

It's normal that, seven days after the being intent on awakening is
born, his mother passes away and is reborn in the host of joyful
gods.[708](#endnotes.xhtml_note-708){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-708
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, while other women carry the infant in the womb for
nine or ten months before giving birth, not so the mother of the being
intent on awakening. She gives birth after exactly ten
months.[709](#endnotes.xhtml_note-709){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-709
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, while other women give birth while sitting or lying
down, not so the mother of the being intent on awakening. She only gives
birth standing
up.[710](#endnotes.xhtml_note-710){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-710
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, gods receive him first, then humans. This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, before he reaches the ground, four gods receive him and
place him before his mother, saying: 'Rejoice, O Queen! An illustrious
son is born to you.' This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, he emerges already clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus,
blood, or any other kind of impurity, pure and clean. Suppose a
jewel-treasure was placed on a cloth from Kāsi. The jewel would not soil
the cloth, nor would the cloth soil the
jewel.[711](#endnotes.xhtml_note-711){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-711
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because of the cleanliness of
them both.

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, he emerges already clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus,
blood, or any other kind of impurity, pure and clean. This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, two showers of water appear from the sky, one cool, one
warm, for bathing the being intent on awakening and his mother. This is
normal in such a case.

It's normal that, as soon as he's born, the being intent on awakening
stands firm with his own feet on the ground. Facing north, he takes
seven strides with a white parasol held above him, surveys all quarters,
and makes this dramatic proclamation: 'I am the foremost in the world! I
am the eldest in the world! I am the first in the world! This is my last
rebirth; now there'll be no more future
lives.'[712](#endnotes.xhtml_note-712){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-712
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, then---in this world with its gods, Māras, and
divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the
glory of the gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so
utterly dark that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and
powerful, makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears, surpassing the glory of the gods. And the sentient beings
reborn there recognize each other by that light: 'So, it seems other
sentient beings have been reborn here!' And this ten-thousandfold galaxy
shakes and rocks and trembles. And an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears in the world, surpassing the glory of the gods. This is normal
in such a case.

### 3. The Thirty-Two Marks of a Great Man {.subheading}

When Prince Vipassī was born, they announced it to King
Bandhumā,[713](#endnotes.xhtml_note-713){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-713
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sire, your son is born! Let your majesty
examine him!' When the king had examined the prince, he had the brahmin
soothsayers summoned and said to
them,[714](#endnotes.xhtml_note-714){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-714
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Gentlemen, please examine the prince.'
When they had examined him they said to the king, 'Rejoice, O King! An
illustrious son is born to you. You are fortunate, so very fortunate, to
have a son such as this born in this family! For the prince has the
thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses these has
only two possible destinies, no
other.[715](#endnotes.xhtml_note-715){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-715
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven treasures. He has the following seven
treasures:[716](#endnotes.xhtml_note-716){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-716
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the
jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh
treasure. He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. But if he goes forth
from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world.

And what are the marks which he
possesses?[717](#endnotes.xhtml_note-717){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-717
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has well-planted
feet.[718](#endnotes.xhtml_note-718){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-718
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and
hubs, complete in every
detail.[719](#endnotes.xhtml_note-719){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-719
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has stretched
heels.[720](#endnotes.xhtml_note-720){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-720
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has long
fingers.[721](#endnotes.xhtml_note-721){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-721
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hands and feet are
tender.[722](#endnotes.xhtml_note-722){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-722
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has serried hands and
feet.[723](#endnotes.xhtml_note-723){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-723
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The tops of his feet are
arched.[724](#endnotes.xhtml_note-724){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-724
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His calves are like those of an
antelope.[725](#endnotes.xhtml_note-725){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-725
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands
touch the
knees.[726](#endnotes.xhtml_note-726){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-726
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His private parts are covered in a
foreskin.[727](#endnotes.xhtml_note-727){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-727
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous
gold.[728](#endnotes.xhtml_note-728){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-728
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.[729](#endnotes.xhtml_note-729){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-729
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hairs grow one per
pore.[730](#endnotes.xhtml_note-730){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-730
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hairs stand up; they're blue-black and curl
clockwise.[731](#endnotes.xhtml_note-731){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-731
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His body is tall and
straight-limbed.[732](#endnotes.xhtml_note-732){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-732
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has bulging muscles in seven
places.[733](#endnotes.xhtml_note-733){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-733
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His chest is like that of a
lion.[734](#endnotes.xhtml_note-734){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-734
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He is filled out between the
shoulders.[735](#endnotes.xhtml_note-735){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-735
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his
arms equals the height of his
body.[736](#endnotes.xhtml_note-736){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-736
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His torso is cylindrical.

He has ridged taste
buds.[737](#endnotes.xhtml_note-737){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-737
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His jaw is like that of a lion.

He has forty teeth.

His teeth are
even.[738](#endnotes.xhtml_note-738){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-738
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His teeth have no gaps.

His teeth are perfectly white.

He has a large
tongue.[739](#endnotes.xhtml_note-739){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-739
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has the voice of the Divinity, like a cuckoo's call.

His eyes are
indigo.[740](#endnotes.xhtml_note-740){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-740
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has eyelashes like a
cow's.[741](#endnotes.xhtml_note-741){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-741
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like
cotton-wool.

The crown of his head is like a
turban.[742](#endnotes.xhtml_note-742){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-742
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man that the prince has. A
great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other.
If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch. But if
he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world.'

### 4. How He Came to be Known as Vipassī {.subheading}

Then King Bandhumā had the brahmin soothsayers dressed in unworn clothes
and satisfied all their
needs.[743](#endnotes.xhtml_note-743){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-743
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the king appointed nursemaids for
Prince
Vipassī.[744](#endnotes.xhtml_note-744){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-744
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Some suckled him, some bathed him, some
held him, and some carried him on their hip. From when he was born, a
white parasol was held over him night and day, with the thought, 'Don't
let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother him.' He was dear and
beloved by many people, like a blue water lily, or a pink or white
lotus. He was always passed from hip to hip.

From when he was born, his voice was charming, graceful, sweet, and
lovely. It was as sweet as the song of a cuckoo-bird found in the
Himalayas.

From when he was born, Prince Vipassī had the power of clairvoyance
which manifested as a result of past deeds, by which he could see for a
league all around both by day and by
night.[745](#endnotes.xhtml_note-745){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-745
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And he was unblinkingly watchful, like the gods of the thirty-three. And
because it was said that he was unblinkingly watchful, he came to be
known as
'Vipassī'.[746](#endnotes.xhtml_note-746){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-746
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then while King Bandhumā was sitting in judgment, he'd sit Prince
Vipassī in his lap and explain the case to him. And sitting there in his
father's lap, Vipassī would thoroughly consider the case and draw a
conclusion using a logical procedure. So this was all the more reason
for him to be known as
'Vipassī'.[747](#endnotes.xhtml_note-747){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-747
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then King Bandhumā had three stilt longhouses built for him---one for
the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season, and
provided him with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. Prince Vipassī
stayed in a stilt longhouse without coming downstairs for the four
months of the rainy season, where he was entertained by musicians---none
of them men.

The first recitation section.

### 5. The Old Man {.subheading}

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince Vipassī addressed his
charioteer,[748](#endnotes.xhtml_note-748){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-748
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'My dear charioteer, harness the finest
chariots. We will go to a park and see the scenery.'

'Yes, sir,' replied the charioteer. He harnessed the chariots and
informed the prince, 'Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please go
at your convenience.' Then Prince Vipassī mounted a fine carriage and,
along with other fine carriages, set out for the park.

Along the way he saw an elderly man, bent double, crooked, leaning on a
staff, trembling as he walked, ailing, past his prime. He addressed his
charioteer, 'My dear charioteer, what has that man done? For his hair
and his body are unlike those of other men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called an old man.'

'But why is he called an old man?'

'He's called an old man because now he has not long to live.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to grow old? Am I not exempt from
old age?'

'Everyone is liable to grow old, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from old age.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal
compound.'[749](#endnotes.xhtml_note-749){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-749
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and
sad:[750](#endnotes.xhtml_note-750){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-750
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old
age will come to anyone who's born.'

Then King Bandhumā summoned the charioteer and said, 'My dear
charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope he was
happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the old man and the prince's reaction.

### 6. The Sick Man {.subheading}

Then King Bandhumā thought, 'Prince Vipassī must not renounce the
throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to homelessness. And the
words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come
true.'[751](#endnotes.xhtml_note-751){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-751
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} To this end he provided the prince with
even more of the five kinds of sensual stimulation, with which the
prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince Vipassī had his
charioteer drive him to the park once
more.[752](#endnotes.xhtml_note-752){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-752
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Along the way he saw a man who was sick, suffering, gravely ill,
collapsed in his own urine and feces, being picked up by some and put
down by others. He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear charioteer, what
has that man done? For his eyes and his voice are unlike those of other
men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called a sick man.'

'But why is he called a sick man?'

'He's called a sick man; hopefully he will recover from that illness.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to fall sick? Am I not exempt from
sickness?'

'Everyone is liable to fall sick, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from sickness.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal compound.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and sad:
'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old age and sickness will come
to anyone who's born.'

Then King Bandhumā summoned the charioteer and said, 'My dear
charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope he was
happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the sick man and the prince's reaction.

### 7. The Dead Man {.subheading}

Then King Bandhumā thought, 'Prince Vipassī must not renounce the
throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to homelessness. And the
words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come true.' To this end he
provided the prince with even more of the five kinds of sensual
stimulation, with which the prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince Vipassī had his
charioteer drive him to the park once more.

Along the way he saw a large crowd gathered making a bier out of
garments of different
colors.[753](#endnotes.xhtml_note-753){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-753
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear
charioteer, why is that crowd making a bier?'

'That, Your Majesty, is for someone who's departed.'

'Well then, drive the chariot up to the departed.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer, and did so.

When the prince saw the corpse of the departed, he addressed the
charioteer, 'But why is he called departed?'

'He's called departed because now his mother and father, his relatives
and kin shall see him no more, and he shall never again see them.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to die? Am I not exempt from death?
Will the king and queen and my other relatives and kin see me no more?
And shall I never again see them?'

'Everyone is liable to die, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from death. The king and queen and your other relatives and kin
shall see you no more, and you shall never again see them.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal compound.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and sad:
'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old age, sickness, and death
will come to anyone who's born.'

Then King Bandhumā summoned the charioteer and said, 'My dear
charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope he was
happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the dead man and the prince's reaction.

### 8. The Renunciate {.subheading}

Then King Bandhumā thought, 'Prince Vipassī must not renounce the
throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to homelessness. And the
words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come true.' To this end he
provided the prince with even more of the five kinds of sensual
stimulation, with which the prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince Vipassī had his
charioteer drive him to the park once more.

Along the way he saw a man, a renunciate with shaven head, wearing an
ocher
robe.[754](#endnotes.xhtml_note-754){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-754
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear
charioteer, what has that man done? For his head and his clothes are
unlike those of other men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called a renunciate.'

'But why is he called a renunciate?'

'He is called a renunciate because he celebrates principled and fair
conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and sympathy for
living
creatures.'[755](#endnotes.xhtml_note-755){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-755
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Then I celebrate the one called a renunciate, who celebrates principled
and fair conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and
sympathy for living creatures! Well then, drive the chariot up to that
renunciate.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer, and did so.

Then Prince Vipassī said to that renunciate, 'My good man, what have you
done? For your head and your clothes are unlike those of other men.'

'Sire, I am what is called a renunciate.'

'But why are you called a renunciate?'

'I am called a renunciate because I celebrate principled and fair
conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and sympathy for
living creatures.'

'Then I celebrate the one called a renunciate, who celebrates principled
and fair conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and
sympathy for living creatures!'

### 9. The Going Forth {.subheading}

Then the prince addressed the charioteer, 'Well then, my dear
charioteer, take the chariot and return to the royal compound. I shall
shave off my hair and beard right here, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to
homelessness.'[756](#endnotes.xhtml_note-756){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-756
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Then Prince Vipassī shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher
robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

### 10. A Great Crowd Goes Forth {.subheading}

A large crowd of 84,000 people in the capital of Bandhumatī heard that
Vipassī had gone forth. It occurred to them, 'This must be no ordinary
teaching and training, no ordinary going forth in which Prince Vipassī
has gone forth. If even the prince goes forth, why don't we do the
same?'

Then that great crowd of 84,000 people shaved off their hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and followed the one intent on awakening,
Vipassī, by going forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[757](#endnotes.xhtml_note-757){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-757
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Escorted by that assembly, Vipassī wandered
on tour among the villages, towns, and capital
cities.[758](#endnotes.xhtml_note-758){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-758
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, 'It's
not appropriate for me to live in a crowd. Why don't I live alone,
withdrawn from the group?' After some time he withdrew from the group to
live alone. The 84,000 went one way, but Vipassī went another.

### 11. Vipassī's Reflections {.subheading}

Then as Vipassī, the one intent on awakening, was in private retreat in
his dwelling, this thought came to his
mind,[759](#endnotes.xhtml_note-759){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-759
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Alas, this world has fallen into trouble.
It's born, grows old, dies, passes away, and is reborn, yet it doesn't
understand how to escape from this suffering, from old age and
death.[760](#endnotes.xhtml_note-760){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-760
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Oh, when will an escape be found from this
suffering, from old age and death?'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there old age and death? What
is a condition for old age and
death?'[761](#endnotes.xhtml_note-761){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-761
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with
wisdom,[762](#endnotes.xhtml_note-762){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-762
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'When rebirth exists there's old age and
death. Rebirth is a condition for old age and
death.'[763](#endnotes.xhtml_note-763){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-763
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there rebirth? What is a
condition for
rebirth?'[764](#endnotes.xhtml_note-764){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-764
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When continued existence exists
there's rebirth. Continued existence is a condition for
rebirth.'[765](#endnotes.xhtml_note-765){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-765
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there continued existence?
What is a condition for continued existence?' Then, through rational
application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When grasping
exists there's continued existence. Grasping is a condition for
continued
existence.'[766](#endnotes.xhtml_note-766){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-766
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there grasping? What is a
condition for grasping?' Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When craving exists there's grasping.
Craving is a condition for
grasping.'[767](#endnotes.xhtml_note-767){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-767
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there craving? What is a
condition for craving?' Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When feeling exists there's craving.
Feeling is a condition for
craving.'[768](#endnotes.xhtml_note-768){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-768
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there feeling? What is a
condition for feeling?' Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When contact exists there's feeling.
Contact is a condition for
feeling.'[769](#endnotes.xhtml_note-769){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-769
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there contact? What is a
condition for contact?' Then, through rational application of mind,
Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When the six sense fields exist
there's contact. The six sense fields are a condition for
contact.'[770](#endnotes.xhtml_note-770){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-770
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists are there the six sense fields?
What is a condition for the six sense fields?' Then, through rational
application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When name and
form exist there are the six sense fields. Name and form are a condition
for the six sense
fields.'[771](#endnotes.xhtml_note-771){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-771
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists are there name and form? What is
a condition for name and form?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When consciousness exists there
are name and form. Consciousness is a condition for name and
form.'[772](#endnotes.xhtml_note-772){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-772
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what exists is there consciousness? What is
a condition for consciousness?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When name and form exist
there's consciousness. Name and form are a condition for
consciousness.'[773](#endnotes.xhtml_note-773){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-773
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'This consciousness turns back from name and form,
and doesn't go beyond
that.'[774](#endnotes.xhtml_note-774){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-774
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is to this extent that one may be
reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear. That is: Name and form
are conditions for consciousness. Consciousness is a condition for name
and form. Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. The six
sense fields are conditions for contact. Contact is a condition for
feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for
grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued
existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age
and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to
be.[775](#endnotes.xhtml_note-775){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-775
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.'

'Origination, origination.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom,
realization, and light that arose in Vipassī, the one intent on
awakening, regarding teachings not learned before from
another.[776](#endnotes.xhtml_note-776){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-776
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no old age and
death? When what ceases do old age and death cease?' Then, through
rational application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When
rebirth doesn't exist there's no old age and death. When rebirth ceases,
old age and death cease.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no rebirth? When
what ceases does rebirth cease?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When continued existence
doesn't exist there's no rebirth. When continued existence ceases,
rebirth ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no continued
existence? When what ceases does continued existence cease?' Then,
through rational application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom,
'When grasping doesn't exist there's no continued existence. When
grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no grasping?
When what ceases does grasping cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When craving
doesn't exist there's no grasping. When craving ceases, grasping
ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no craving? When
what ceases does craving cease?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When feeling doesn't exist
there's no craving. When feeling ceases, craving ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no feeling? When
what ceases does feeling cease?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When contact doesn't exist
there's no feeling. When contact ceases, feeling ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no contact? When
what ceases does contact cease?' Then, through rational application of
mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When the six sense fields don't
exist there's no contact. When the six sense fields cease, contact
ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist are there no six sense
fields? When what ceases do the six sense fields cease?' Then, through
rational application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When
name and form don't exist there are no six sense fields. When name and
form cease, the six sense fields cease.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist are there no name and
form? When what ceases do name and form cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When
consciousness doesn't exist there are no name and form. When
consciousness ceases, name and form cease.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
consciousness? When what ceases does consciousness cease?' Then, through
rational application of mind, Vipassī comprehended with wisdom, 'When
name and form don't exist there's no consciousness. When name and form
cease, consciousness ceases.'

Then Vipassī thought, 'I have discovered the path to awakening. That
is:[777](#endnotes.xhtml_note-777){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-777
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When name and form cease, consciousness
ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and
form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease,
contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling
ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When
grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence
ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases.'

'Cessation, cessation.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom,
realization, and light that arose in Vipassī, the one intent on
awakening, regarding teachings not learned before from
another.[778](#endnotes.xhtml_note-778){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-778
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After some time he meditated observing rise and fall in the five
grasping
aggregates.[779](#endnotes.xhtml_note-779){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-779
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such is feeling, such is the origin of
feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the
origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. Such are
choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of
choices.[780](#endnotes.xhtml_note-780){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-780
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is consciousness, such is the origin
of consciousness, such is the ending of
consciousness.'[781](#endnotes.xhtml_note-781){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-781
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Meditating like this his mind was soon
freed from defilements by not
grasping.[782](#endnotes.xhtml_note-782){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-782
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The second recitation section.

### 12. The Appeal of the Divinity {.subheading}

Then the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha,
thought,[783](#endnotes.xhtml_note-783){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-783
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Why don't I teach the
Dhamma?'[784](#endnotes.xhtml_note-784){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-784
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then he thought, 'This principle I have discovered is deep, hard to see,
hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic,
subtle, comprehensible to the
astute.[785](#endnotes.xhtml_note-785){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-785
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But people like clinging, they love it and
enjoy it.[786](#endnotes.xhtml_note-786){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-786
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's hard for them to see this topic; that
is, specific conditionality, dependent
origination.[787](#endnotes.xhtml_note-787){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-787
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's also hard for them to see this topic;
that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.[788](#endnotes.xhtml_note-788){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-788
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And if I were to teach the Dhamma, others
might not understand me, which would be wearying and troublesome for
me.'[789](#endnotes.xhtml_note-789){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-789
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired, nor
learned before in the past, occurred to
him:[790](#endnotes.xhtml_note-790){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-790
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'I've struggled hard to realize this,\
> enough with trying to explain it!\
> Those mired in greed and hate\
> can't really understand this teaching.
>
> It goes against the stream, subtle,\
> deep, obscure, and very fine.\
> Those besotted by greed cannot see,\
> for they're shrouded in a mass of
> darkness.'[791](#endnotes.xhtml_note-791){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-791
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So, as the Buddha Vipassī reflected like this, his mind inclined to
remaining passive, not to teaching the
Dhamma.[792](#endnotes.xhtml_note-792){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-792
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then a certain Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha Vipassī's train of
thought,
thought,[793](#endnotes.xhtml_note-793){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-793
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Alas! The world will be lost, the world
will perish! For the mind of the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha, inclines to remaining passive, not to
teaching the Dhamma.' Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of divinity and
reappeared in front of the Buddha Vipassī. He arranged his robe over one
shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his joined palms toward the
Buddha Vipassī, and said, 'Sir, let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!
Let the Holy One teach the
Dhamma\![794](#endnotes.xhtml_note-794){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-794
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are beings with little dust in their
eyes. They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There
will be those who understand the
teaching!'[795](#endnotes.xhtml_note-795){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-795
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, the Buddha Vipassī said to him, 'I too thought this,
Divinity, "Why don't I teach the Dhamma?" Then it occurred to me, "If I
were to teach the Dhamma, others might not understand me, which would be
wearying and troublesome for me."

So, as I reflected like this, my mind inclined to remaining passive, not
to teaching the Dhamma.'

For a second time, and a third time that Great Divinity begged the
Buddha to teach.

Then, understanding the Divinity's invitation, the Buddha Vipassī
surveyed the world with the eye of a Buddha, out of his compassion for
sentient
beings.[796](#endnotes.xhtml_note-796){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-796
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And he saw sentient beings with little dust
in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes; with keen
faculties and with weak faculties, with good qualities and with bad
qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And some of them lived
seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next world, while others
did not.[797](#endnotes.xhtml_note-797){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-797
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or
pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without
rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in
the water reaching the water's surface. And some of them sprout and grow
in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water
clinging to them.

In the same way, the Buddha Vipassī saw sentient beings with little dust
in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes.

Then that Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha Vipassī's train of thought,
addressed him in verse:

> 'Standing high on a rocky mountain,\
> you can see the people all around.\
> In just the same way, All-seer, so intelligent,\
> having ascended the Temple of Truth,\
> rid of sorrow, look upon the people\
> swamped with sorrow, `<j>`{=html}oppressed by rebirth and old age.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Rise, hero! Victor in battle, leader of the caravan,\
> wander the world free of debt.\
> Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!\
> There will be those who understand!'

Then the Buddha Vipassī addressed that Great Divinity in verse:

> 'Flung open are the doors to freedom from death!\
> Let those with ears to hear commit to
> faith.[798](#endnotes.xhtml_note-798){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-798
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Thinking it would be troublesome, Divinity, `<j>`{=html}I did not
> teach `</j>`{=html}\
> the sophisticated, sublime Dhamma among humans.'

Then the Great Divinity, knowing that his request for the Buddha Vipassī
to teach the Dhamma had been granted, bowed and respectfully circled
him, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

### 13. The Chief Disciples {.subheading}

Then the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, thought, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will quickly
understand this teaching?' Then he thought, 'That Khaṇḍa, the king's
son, and Tissa, the high priest's son, are astute, competent, clever,
and have long had little dust in their
eyes.[799](#endnotes.xhtml_note-799){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-799
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I teach them first of all? They
will quickly understand this teaching.'

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
he vanished from the tree of awakening and reappeared near the capital
city of Bandhumatī, in the deer park named
Sanctuary.[800](#endnotes.xhtml_note-800){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-800
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha Vipassī addressed the park
keeper,[801](#endnotes.xhtml_note-801){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-801
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'My dear park keeper, please enter the city
and say this to the king's son Khaṇḍa and the high priest's son Tissa:
"Sirs, the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, has arrived at Bandhumatī and is staying in the deer park named
Sanctuary. He wishes to see you."'

'Yes, sir,' replied the park keeper, and did as he was asked.

Then the king's son Khaṇḍa and the high priest's son Tissa had the
finest carriages harnessed. Then they mounted a fine carriage and, along
with other fine carriages, set out from Bandhumatī for the Sanctuary.
They went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and
approached the Buddha Vipassī on foot. They bowed and sat down to one
side.

The Buddha Vipassī taught them step by step, with a talk on giving,
ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual
pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. And
when he knew that their minds were ready, pliable, rid of hindrances,
elated, and confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas:
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean
cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very seat the
stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the king's son
Khaṇḍa and the high priest's son Tissa: 'Everything that has a beginning
has an end.'

They saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. They went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. They said to
the Buddha Vipassī, 'Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting
the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. We go
for refuge to the Blessed One and to the teaching. Sir, may we receive
the going forth and ordination in the Buddha's presence?'

And they received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha
Vipassī's
presence.[802](#endnotes.xhtml_note-802){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-802
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha Vipassī educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. He explained
the drawbacks of conditioned phenomena, so sordid and corrupt, and the
benefit of extinguishment. Being taught like this their minds were soon
freed from defilements by not
grasping.[803](#endnotes.xhtml_note-803){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-803
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 14. The Going Forth of the Large Crowd {.subheading}

A large crowd of 84,000 people in the capital of Bandhumatī heard that
the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha,
had arrived at Bandhumatī and was staying in the deer park named
Sanctuary. And they heard that the king's son Khaṇḍa and the high
priest's son Tissa had shaved off their hair and beard, dressed in ocher
robes, and gone forth from the lay life to homelessness in the Buddha's
presence. It occurred to them, 'This must be no ordinary teaching and
training, no ordinary going forth in which the king's son Khaṇḍa and the
high priest's son Tissa have gone forth. If even they go forth, why
don't we do the same?' Then those 84,000 people left Bandhumatī for the
deer park named Sanctuary, where they approached the Buddha Vipassī,
bowed and sat down to one side.

The Buddha Vipassī taught them step by step, with a talk on giving,
ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual
pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. And
when he knew that their minds were ready, pliable, rid of hindrances,
elated, and confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas:
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean
cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very seat the
stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in those 84,000 people:
'Everything that has a beginning has an end.'

They saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. They went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. They said to
the Buddha Vipassī, 'Excellent, sir! Excellent!' And just like Khaṇḍa
and Tissa they asked for and received ordination. Then the Buddha taught
them further.

Being taught like this their minds were soon freed from defilements by
not grasping.

### 15. The 84,000 Who Had Gone Forth Previously {.subheading}

The 84,000 people who had gone forth previously also heard: 'It seems
the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha,
has arrived at Bandhumatī and is staying in the deer park named
Sanctuary. And he is teaching the Dhamma!' Then they too went to see the
Buddha Vipassī, realized the Dhamma, went forth, and became freed from
defilements.

### 16. The Allowance to Wander {.subheading}

Now at that time a large Saṅgha of 6,800,000 mendicants were residing at
Bandhumatī. As the Buddha Vipassī was in private retreat this thought
came to his mind, 'The Saṅgha residing at Bandhumatī now is large. What
if I was to urge them:

"Wander forth, mendicants, for the welfare and happiness of the people,
out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and
humans.[804](#endnotes.xhtml_note-804){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-804
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let not two go by one road. Teach the
Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased. And reveal a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. There are beings with little dust in their eyes.
They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will
be those who understand the teaching! But when six years have passed,
you must all come to Bandhumatī to recite the monastic
code."'[805](#endnotes.xhtml_note-805){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-805
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then a certain Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha Vipassī's train of
thought, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their
arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the
Buddha Vipassī. He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his
joined palms toward the Buddha Vipassī, and said, 'That's so true,
Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! The Saṅgha residing at Bandhumatī
now is large. Please urge them to wander, as you thought. And sir, I'll
make sure that when six years have passed the mendicants will return to
Bandhumatī to recite the monastic code.'

That's what that Great Divinity said. Then he bowed and respectfully
circled the Buddha Vipassī, keeping him on his right side, before
vanishing right there.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha Vipassī came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants, telling them all that had happened. Then he
said,

'Wander forth, mendicants, for the welfare and happiness of the people,
out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans. Let not two go by one road. Teach the Dhamma that's
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And reveal a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. There are beings with little dust in their eyes.
They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will
be those who understand the teaching! But when six years have passed,
you must all come to Bandhumatī to recite the monastic code.'

Then most of the mendicants departed to wander the country that very
day.

Now at that time there were 84,000 monasteries in the Black Plum Tree
Land.[806](#endnotes.xhtml_note-806){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-806
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when the first year came to an end the
deities raised the cry: 'Good sirs, the first year has ended. Now five
years remain. When five years have passed, you must all go to Bandhumatī
to recite the monastic code.'

And when the second year ... the third year ... the fourth year ... the
fifth year came to an end, the deities raised the cry: 'Good sirs, the
fifth year has ended. Now one year remains. When one year has passed,
you must all go to Bandhumatī to recite the monastic code.'

And when the sixth year came to an end the deities raised the cry: 'Good
sirs, the sixth year has ended. Now is the time that you must go to
Bandhumatī to recite the monastic code.' Then that very day the
mendicants went to Bandhumatī to recite the monastic code. Some went by
their own psychic power, and some by the psychic power of the deities.

And there the Blessed One Vipassī, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, recited the monastic code
thus:[807](#endnotes.xhtml_note-807){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-807
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'Patient acceptance is the ultimate
> fervor.[808](#endnotes.xhtml_note-808){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-808
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Extinguishment is the ultimate, say the
> Buddhas.[809](#endnotes.xhtml_note-809){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-809
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> No true renunciate injures another,\
> nor does an ascetic hurt another.
>
> Not to do any
> evil;[810](#endnotes.xhtml_note-810){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-810
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> to embrace the
> good;[811](#endnotes.xhtml_note-811){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-811
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> to purify one's
> mind:[812](#endnotes.xhtml_note-812){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-812
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> this is the instruction of the
> Buddhas.[813](#endnotes.xhtml_note-813){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-813
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Not speaking ill nor doing harm;\
> restraint in the monastic
> code;[814](#endnotes.xhtml_note-814){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-814
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> moderation in eating;\
> staying in remote lodgings;\
> commitment to the higher
> mind---[815](#endnotes.xhtml_note-815){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-815
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> this is the instruction of the Buddhas.'

### 17. Being Informed by Deities {.subheading}

This one time, mendicants, I was staying near Ukkaṭṭhā, in the Subhaga
Forest at the root of a magnificent sal
tree.[816](#endnotes.xhtml_note-816){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-816
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As I was in private retreat this thought
came to mind, 'It's not easy to find an abode of sentient beings where I
haven't previously abided in all this long time, except for the gods of
the pure
abodes.[817](#endnotes.xhtml_note-817){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-817
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I go to see them?'

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, I
vanished from the Subhaga Forest and reappeared with the gods of Aviha.

In that order of gods, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of
deities approached me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to
me,[818](#endnotes.xhtml_note-818){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-818
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Ninety-one eons ago, good sir, the Buddha
Vipassī arose in the world, perfected and fully awakened. He was born as
an aristocrat into an aristocrat family. Koṇḍañña was his clan. He lived
for 80,000 years. He was awakened at the root of a patala tree. He had a
fine pair of chief disciples named Khaṇḍa and Tissa. He had three
gatherings of disciples---one of 6,800,000, one of 100,000, and one of
80,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their defilements. He had
as chief attendant a mendicant named Asoka. His father was King
Bandhumā, his birth mother was Queen Bandhumatī, and their capital city
was named Bandhumatī. And such was his renunciation, such his going
forth, such his striving, such his awakening, and such his rolling forth
of the wheel of
Dhamma.[819](#endnotes.xhtml_note-819){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-819
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And good sir, after leading the spiritual
life under that Buddha Vipassī we lost our desire for sensual pleasures
and were reborn
here.'[820](#endnotes.xhtml_note-820){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-820
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And other deities came and similarly recounted the details of the
Buddhas Sikhī, Vessabhū, Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, and
Kassapa.[821](#endnotes.xhtml_note-821){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-821
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In that order of gods, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of
deities approached me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me, 'In the
present fortunate eon, good sir, you have arisen in the world, perfected
and fully awakened. You were born as an aristocrat into an aristocrat
family. Gotama is your clan. For you the life-span is short, brief, and
fleeting. A long-lived person lives for a century or a little more. You
were awakened at the root of a peepal tree. You have a fine pair of
chief disciples named Sāriputta and Moggallāna. You have had one
gathering of disciples---1,250 mendicants who had ended their
defilements. You have as chief attendant a mendicant named Ānanda. Your
father was King Suddhodana, your birth mother was Queen Māyā, and your
capital city was Kapilavatthu. And such was your renunciation, such your
going forth, such your striving, such your awakening, and such your
rolling forth of the wheel of Dhamma. And good sir, after leading the
spiritual life under you we lost our desire for sensual pleasures and
were reborn here.'

Then together with the gods of Aviha I went to see the gods of Atappa
... the gods fair to see ... and the fair seeing gods. Then together
with all these gods I went to see the gods of Akaniṭṭha, where we had a
similar conversation.

And that is how the Realized One is able to recollect the birth, names,
clans, life-span, chief disciples, and gatherings of disciples of the
Buddhas of the past who have become fully quenched, cut off
proliferation, cut off the track, finished off the cycle, and
transcended all suffering. It is both because I have clearly
comprehended the principle of the teachings, and also because the
deities told
me."[822](#endnotes.xhtml_note-822){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-822
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn15">

## [DN 15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Causation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahānidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. Dependent Origination {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[823](#endnotes.xhtml_note-823){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-823
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named
Kammāsadamma.[824](#endnotes.xhtml_note-824){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-824
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to
him,[825](#endnotes.xhtml_note-825){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-825
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, in
that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it
seems as plain as can
be."[826](#endnotes.xhtml_note-826){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-826
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Don't say that, Ānanda, don't say that! This dependent origination is
deep and appears
deep.[827](#endnotes.xhtml_note-827){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-827
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is because of not understanding and not
penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like
string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds,
and it doesn't escape the places of loss, the bad places, the
underworld,
transmigration.[828](#endnotes.xhtml_note-828){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-828
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for old age and death?' you
should answer, 'There
is.'[829](#endnotes.xhtml_note-829){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-829
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they say, 'What is a condition for old
age and death?' you should answer, 'Rebirth is a condition for old age
and
death.'[830](#endnotes.xhtml_note-830){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-830
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for rebirth?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for rebirth?' you
should answer, 'Continued existence is a condition for
rebirth.'[831](#endnotes.xhtml_note-831){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-831
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for continued existence?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
continued existence?' you should answer, 'Grasping is a condition for
continued
existence.'[832](#endnotes.xhtml_note-832){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-832
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for grasping?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for grasping?' you
should answer, 'Craving is a condition for grasping.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for craving?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for craving?' you
should answer, 'Feeling is a condition for
craving.'[833](#endnotes.xhtml_note-833){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-833
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for feeling?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for feeling?' you
should answer, 'Contact is a condition for feeling.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for contact?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for contact?' you
should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for
contact.'[834](#endnotes.xhtml_note-834){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-834
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for name and form?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for name
and form?' you should answer, 'Consciousness is a condition for name and
form.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for consciousness?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
consciousness?' you should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for
consciousness.'[835](#endnotes.xhtml_note-835){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-835
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So: name and form are conditions for consciousness. Consciousness is a
condition for name and form. Name and form are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving.
Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for
continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress to come to
be.[836](#endnotes.xhtml_note-836){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-836
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.

'Rebirth is a condition for old age and death'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is
so.[837](#endnotes.xhtml_note-837){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-837
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
rebirth for anyone
anywhere.[838](#endnotes.xhtml_note-838){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-838
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is, there were no rebirth of sentient
beings into their various realms---of gods, centaurs, spirits,
creatures, humans, quadrupeds, birds, or reptiles, each into their own
realm. When there's no rebirth at all, with the cessation of rebirth,
would old age and death still be
found?"[839](#endnotes.xhtml_note-839){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-839
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of old age and
death, namely
rebirth.[840](#endnotes.xhtml_note-840){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-840
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no continued existence for anyone anywhere. That is,
continued existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, or
the formless realm. When there's no continued existence at all, with the
cessation of continued existence, would rebirth still be
found?"[841](#endnotes.xhtml_note-841){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-841
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of rebirth,
namely continued existence.

'Grasping is a condition for continued existence'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no grasping for anyone anywhere. That is, grasping
at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self. When there's no grasping at all, with the cessation of grasping,
would continued existence still be
found?"[842](#endnotes.xhtml_note-842){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-842
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of continued
existence, namely grasping.

'Craving is a condition for grasping'---that's what I said. And this is
a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and
utterly no craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. When there's no craving at
all, with the cessation of craving, would grasping still be
found?"[843](#endnotes.xhtml_note-843){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-843
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of grasping,
namely craving.

'Feeling is a condition for craving'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no feeling for anyone anywhere. That is, feeling born of contact through
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no feeling at
all, with the cessation of feeling, would craving still be
found?"[844](#endnotes.xhtml_note-844){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-844
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of craving,
namely feeling.

So it is, Ānanda, that feeling is a cause of craving. Craving is a cause
of seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material things. Gaining
material things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is a cause of
desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment. Attachment is
a cause of ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess. Stinginess is
a cause of
safeguarding.[845](#endnotes.xhtml_note-845){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-845
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful
things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments,
and disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and
lies.[846](#endnotes.xhtml_note-846){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-846
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking
up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes,
accusations, divisive speech, and lies'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is
so.[847](#endnotes.xhtml_note-847){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-847
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
safeguarding for anyone anywhere. When there's no safeguarding at all,
with the cessation of safeguarding, would those many bad, unskillful
things still come to be?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason for the
origination of those many bad, unskillful things, namely safeguarding.

'Stinginess is a cause of safeguarding'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is
so.[848](#endnotes.xhtml_note-848){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-848
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
stinginess for anyone anywhere. When there's no stinginess at all, with
the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
safeguarding, namely stinginess.

'Ownership is a cause of stinginess'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no ownership for anyone anywhere. When there's no ownership at all, with
the cessation of ownership, would stinginess still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of stinginess,
namely ownership.

'Attachment is a cause of ownership'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is
so.[849](#endnotes.xhtml_note-849){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-849
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
attachment for anyone anywhere. When there's no attachment at all, with
the cessation of attachment, would ownership still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of ownership,
namely attachment.

'Desire and lust is a cause of attachment'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally
and utterly no desire and lust for anyone anywhere. When there's no
desire and lust at all, with the cessation of desire and lust, would
attachment still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of attachment,
namely desire and lust.

Evaluation is a cause of desire and lust'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is
so.[850](#endnotes.xhtml_note-850){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-850
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
evaluation for anyone anywhere. When there's no evaluation at all, with
the cessation of evaluation, would desire and lust still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of desire and
lust, namely evaluation.

'Gaining material things is a cause of evaluation'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is
so.[851](#endnotes.xhtml_note-851){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-851
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
gaining of material things for anyone anywhere. When there's no gaining
of material things at all, with the cessation of gaining material
things, would evaluation still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of evaluation,
namely the gaining of material things.

'Seeking is a cause of gaining material things'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is
so.[852](#endnotes.xhtml_note-852){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-852
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
seeking for anyone anywhere. When there's no seeking at all, with the
cessation of seeking, would the gaining of material things still be
found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of gaining
material things, namely seeking.

'Craving is a cause of seeking'---that's what I said. And this is a way
to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly no
craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving for continued existence, and craving to end existence. When
there's no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would seeking
still be
found?"[853](#endnotes.xhtml_note-853){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-853
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of seeking,
namely craving. And so, Ānanda, these two things are united by the two
aspects of
feeling.[854](#endnotes.xhtml_note-854){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-854
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Contact is a condition for feeling'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is
so.[855](#endnotes.xhtml_note-855){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-855
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were totally and utterly no
contact for anyone anywhere. That is, contact through the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no contact at all, with the
cessation of contact, would feeling still be
found?"[856](#endnotes.xhtml_note-856){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-856
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of feeling,
namely contact.

'Name and form are conditions for contact'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is
so.[857](#endnotes.xhtml_note-857){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-857
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were none of the features,
attributes, signs, and details by which the set of mental phenomena
known as name is found. Would labeling contact still be found in the set
of physical
phenomena?"[858](#endnotes.xhtml_note-858){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-858
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of physical phenomena known as form is found. Would
impingement contact still be found in the set of mental
phenomena?"[859](#endnotes.xhtml_note-859){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-859
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of phenomena known as name and the set of phenomena
known as form are found. Would either labeling contact or impingement
contact still be
found?"[860](#endnotes.xhtml_note-860){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-860
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which name and form are found. Would contact still be
found?"[861](#endnotes.xhtml_note-861){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-861
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of contact,
namely name and form.

'Consciousness is a condition for name and form'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is
so.[862](#endnotes.xhtml_note-862){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-862
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If consciousness were not conceived in the
mother's womb, would name and form coagulate
there?"[863](#endnotes.xhtml_note-863){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-863
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"If consciousness, after being conceived in the mother's womb, were to
be miscarried, would name and form be born into this
place?"[864](#endnotes.xhtml_note-864){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-864
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would
name and form achieve growth, increase, and
maturity?"[865](#endnotes.xhtml_note-865){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-865
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of name and
form, namely consciousness.

'Name and form are conditions for consciousness'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is
so.[866](#endnotes.xhtml_note-866){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-866
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If consciousness were not to gain a footing
in name and form, would the coming to be of the origin of suffering---of
rebirth, old age, and death in the future---be
found?"[867](#endnotes.xhtml_note-867){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-867
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
consciousness, namely name and form. This is the extent to which one may
be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or
reappear.[868](#endnotes.xhtml_note-868){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-868
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how far the scope of labeling,
terminology, and description extends; how far the sphere of wisdom
extends; how far the cycle of rebirths proceeds so that this state of
being may be found; namely, name and form together with
consciousness.[869](#endnotes.xhtml_note-869){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-869
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. Describing the Self {.subheading}

How do those who describe the self describe
it?[870](#endnotes.xhtml_note-870){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-870
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They describe it as formed and
limited:[871](#endnotes.xhtml_note-871){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-871
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'My self is formed and
limited.'[872](#endnotes.xhtml_note-872){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-872
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they describe it as formed and infinite:
'My self is formed and
infinite.'[873](#endnotes.xhtml_note-873){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-873
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they describe it as formless and
limited: 'My self is formless and
limited.'[874](#endnotes.xhtml_note-874){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-874
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they describe it as formless and
infinite: 'My self is formless and
infinite.'[875](#endnotes.xhtml_note-875){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-875
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and limited. They
describe the self in the present as formed and limited; or they describe
it as sure to be in some other place formed and limited; or else they
think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with
what it needs to become like
that.'[876](#endnotes.xhtml_note-876){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-876
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This being so, it's appropriate to say that
a view of self as formed and limited underlies
them.[877](#endnotes.xhtml_note-877){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-877
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and infinite ...
formless and limited ... formless and infinite. They describe the self
as formless and infinite in the present; or as sure to become formless
and infinite in some other place; or else they think: 'Though it is not
like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become
like that.' This being so, it's appropriate to say that a view of self
as formless and infinite underlies them. That's how those who describe
the self describe it.

### 3. Not Describing the Self {.subheading}

How do those who don't describe the self not describe
it?[878](#endnotes.xhtml_note-878){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-878
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't describe it as formed and
limited ... formed and infinite ... formless and limited ... formless
and infinite: 'My self is formless and infinite.'

Now, take those who don't describe the self as formed and limited ...
formed and infinite ... formless and limited ... formless and infinite.
They don't describe the self in the present as formless and infinite; or
as sure to become in some other place formless and infinite; and they
don't think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided
with what it needs to become like that.' This being so, it's appropriate
to say that a view of self as formless and infinite doesn't underlie
them. That's how those who don't describe the self don't describe it.

### 4. Regarding a Self {.subheading}

How do those who regard the self regard
it?[879](#endnotes.xhtml_note-879){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-879
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They regard feeling as
self:[880](#endnotes.xhtml_note-880){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-880
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Feeling is my
self.'[881](#endnotes.xhtml_note-881){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-881
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they regard it like this: 'Feeling is
definitely not my self. My self does not experience
feeling.'[882](#endnotes.xhtml_note-882){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-882
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they regard it like this: 'Feeling is
definitely not my self. But it's not that my self does not experience
feeling. My self feels, for my self is liable to
feel.'[883](#endnotes.xhtml_note-883){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-883
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, as to those who
say:[884](#endnotes.xhtml_note-884){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-884
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Feeling is my self.' You should say this
to them: 'Reverend, there are three feelings: pleasant, painful, and
neutral.[885](#endnotes.xhtml_note-885){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-885
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Which one of these do you regard as self?'
Ānanda, at a time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don't feel a
painful or neutral
feeling;[886](#endnotes.xhtml_note-886){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-886
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} you only feel a pleasant feeling. At a time
when you feel a painful feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or neutral
feeling; you only feel a painful feeling. At a time when you feel a
neutral feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or painful feeling; you only
feel a neutral feeling.

Pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neutral feelings are all
impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish,
fade away, and cease. When feeling a pleasant feeling they think: 'This
is my self.' When their pleasant feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a painful feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their painful feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a neutral feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their neutral feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' So those who say 'feeling is my self' regard as self that
which is evidently impermanent, mixed with pleasure and pain, and liable
to rise and fall. That's why it's not acceptable to regard feeling as
self.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. My self
does not experience feeling.' You should say this to them, 'But
reverend, where there is nothing felt at all, would the thought "I am"
occur
there?'"[887](#endnotes.xhtml_note-887){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-887
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which does not
experience feeling.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. But it's
not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self
is liable to feel.' You should say this to them, 'Suppose feelings were
to totally and utterly cease without anything left over. When there's no
feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought "I am
this" occur
there?'"[888](#endnotes.xhtml_note-888){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-888
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which is liable
to feel.

Not regarding anything in this way, they don't grasp at anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become
extinguished.[889](#endnotes.xhtml_note-889){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-889
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the
spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done,
there is nothing further for this place.'

It wouldn't be appropriate to say that a mendicant whose mind is freed
like this holds the following views: 'A realized one still exists after
death'; 'A realized one no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
both still exists and no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
neither still exists nor no longer exists after death'.

Why is that? A mendicant is freed by directly knowing this: how far
labeling and the scope of labeling extend; how far terminology and the
scope of terminology extend; how far description and the scope of
description extend; how far wisdom and the sphere of wisdom extend; how
far the cycle of rebirths and its continuation extend. It wouldn't be
appropriate to say that a mendicant freed by directly knowing this holds
the view: 'There is no such thing as knowing and
seeing.'[890](#endnotes.xhtml_note-890){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-890
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. Planes of Consciousness {.subheading}

Ānanda, there are seven planes of consciousness and two
dimensions.[891](#endnotes.xhtml_note-891){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-891
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What seven?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first plane of
consciousness.[892](#endnotes.xhtml_note-892){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-892
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

Then there is the dimension of non-percipient beings, and secondly, the
dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[893](#endnotes.xhtml_note-893){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-893
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, regarding these seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions,
is it appropriate for someone who understands them---and their origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape---to take pleasure in
them?"[894](#endnotes.xhtml_note-894){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-894
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"When a mendicant, having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape regarding these seven planes of
consciousness and these two dimensions, is freed by not grasping,
they're called a mendicant who is freed by
wisdom.[895](#endnotes.xhtml_note-895){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-895
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 6. The Eight Liberations {.subheading}

Ānanda, there are these eight
liberations.[896](#endnotes.xhtml_note-896){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-896
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight?

Having physical form, they see
forms.[897](#endnotes.xhtml_note-897){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-897
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms
externally.[898](#endnotes.xhtml_note-898){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-898
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second liberation.

They're focused only on
beauty.[899](#endnotes.xhtml_note-899){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-899
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling.[900](#endnotes.xhtml_note-900){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-900
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations.

When a mendicant enters into and withdraws from these eight
liberations---in forward order, in reverse order, and in forward and
reverse order---wherever they wish, whenever they wish, and for as long
as they
wish;[901](#endnotes.xhtml_note-901){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-901
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and when they realize the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements,
they're called a mendicant who is freed both
ways.[902](#endnotes.xhtml_note-902){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-902
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And, Ānanda, there is no other freedom both
ways that is better or finer than this."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn16">

## [DN 16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Discourse on the Buddha's Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[903](#endnotes.xhtml_note-903){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-903
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. Now at that time King
Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, wanted to invade
the
Vajjis.[904](#endnotes.xhtml_note-904){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-904
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He declared: "I shall wipe out these
Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy them, and lay ruin and
devastation upon
them!"[905](#endnotes.xhtml_note-905){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-905
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then King Ajātasattu addressed Vassakāra the brahmin minister of
Magadha,[906](#endnotes.xhtml_note-906){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-906
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Please, brahmin, go to the Buddha, and in
my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and
well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then say: 'Sir, King
Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, wants to invade
the Vajjis. He says, "I shall wipe out these Vajjis, so mighty and
powerful! I shall destroy them, and lay ruin and devastation upon
them!"'[907](#endnotes.xhtml_note-907){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-907
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Remember well how the Buddha answers and
tell it to me. For Realized Ones say nothing that is not
so."[908](#endnotes.xhtml_note-908){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-908
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. The Brahmin Vassakāra {.subheading}

"Yes, sir," Vassakāra replied. He had the finest carriages harnessed.
Then he mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages,
set out from Rājagaha for the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.[909](#endnotes.xhtml_note-909){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-909
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and approached the Buddha on foot, and exchanged
greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, King Ajātasattu of Magadha,
son of the princess of Videha, bows with his head to your feet. He asks
if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.
Mister Gotama, King Ajātasattu wants to invade the Vajjis. He has
declared: 'I shall wipe out these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I
shall destroy them, and lay ruin and devastation upon them!'"

### 2. Principles That Prevent Decline {.subheading}

Now at that time Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the Buddha fanning
him.[910](#endnotes.xhtml_note-910){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-910
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha said to him, "Ānanda, have
you heard that the Vajjis meet frequently and have many
meetings?"[911](#endnotes.xhtml_note-911){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-911
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings, they can
expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in
harmony, and carry on their business in
harmony?"[912](#endnotes.xhtml_note-912){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-912
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry on
their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish
existing decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian
traditions as they have been
decreed?"[913](#endnotes.xhtml_note-913){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-913
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian traditions as
they have been decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate Vajjian elders, and think them worth listening to?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate Vajjian
elders, and think them worth listening to, they can expect growth, not
decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women
or girls of the clans and make them live with
them?"[914](#endnotes.xhtml_note-914){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-914
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women or girls of the
clans and make them live with them, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate the Vajjian shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the
proper spirit-offerings that were given and made in the
past?"[915](#endnotes.xhtml_note-915){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-915
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajjian
shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the proper
spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past, they can expect
growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis organize proper protection,
shelter, and security for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones
might come to the realm and those already here may live in
comfort?"[916](#endnotes.xhtml_note-916){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-916
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis organize proper protection, shelter, and security
for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones might come to the realm
and those already here may live in comfort, they can expect growth, not
decline."

Then the Buddha said to Vassakāra, "Brahmin, this one time I was staying
near Vesālī at the Sārandada woodland
shrine.[917](#endnotes.xhtml_note-917){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-917
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There I taught the Vajjis these seven
principles that prevent
decline.[918](#endnotes.xhtml_note-918){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-918
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As long as these seven principles that
prevent decline last among the Vajjis, and as long as the Vajjis are
seen following them, they can expect growth, not decline."

When the Buddha had spoken, Vassakāra said to him, "Mister Gotama, if
the Vajjis follow even a single one of these principles they can expect
growth, not decline. How much more so all seven! King Ajātasattu cannot
defeat the Vajjis in war, unless by bribery or by sowing
dissension.[919](#endnotes.xhtml_note-919){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-919
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Well, now, Mister Gotama, I must go. I have
many duties, and much to do."

"Please, brahmin, go at your convenience." Then Vassakāra the brahmin,
having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, got up from his
seat and left.

### 3. Principles That Prevent Decline Among the Mendicants {.subheading}

Soon after he had left, the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Go, Ānanda, gather
all the mendicants staying in the vicinity of Rājagaha together in the
assembly
hall."[920](#endnotes.xhtml_note-920){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-920
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked. Then he went
back, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the mendicant
Saṅgha has assembled. Please, sir, go at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out and addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, I will teach you
these seven principles that prevent
decline.[921](#endnotes.xhtml_note-921){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-921
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"As long as the mendicants meet frequently and have many meetings, they
can expect growth, not
decline.[922](#endnotes.xhtml_note-922){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-922
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry
on their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not
decline.[923](#endnotes.xhtml_note-923){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-923
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but undertake and follow the training rules as they have been
decreed, they can expect growth, not
decline.[924](#endnotes.xhtml_note-924){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-924
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the
senior mendicants---of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and
leaders of the Saṅgha---and think them worth listening to, they can
expect growth, not
decline.[925](#endnotes.xhtml_note-925){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-925
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants don't fall under the sway of arisen craving
for future lives, they can expect growth, not
decline.[926](#endnotes.xhtml_note-926){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-926
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants take care to live in wilderness lodgings, they
can expect growth, not
decline.[927](#endnotes.xhtml_note-927){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-927
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants individually establish mindfulness, so that
more good-hearted spiritual companions might come, and those that have
already come may live comfortably, they can expect growth, not
decline.[928](#endnotes.xhtml_note-928){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-928
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline.
...[929](#endnotes.xhtml_note-929){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-929
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants don't relish work, loving it and liking to
relish it, they can expect growth, not
decline.[930](#endnotes.xhtml_note-930){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-930
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as they don't relish talk ...

sleep ...

company ...

they don't have corrupt wishes, falling under the sway of corrupt wishes
...[931](#endnotes.xhtml_note-931){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-931
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

they don't have bad friends, companions, and associates ...

they don't stop half-way after achieving some insignificant distinction,
they can expect growth, not
decline.[932](#endnotes.xhtml_note-932){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-932
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline.
...[933](#endnotes.xhtml_note-933){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-933
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As long as the mendicants are faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... learned ... energetic ... mindful ...
wise, they can expect growth, not decline. As long as these seven
principles that prevent decline last among the mendicants, and as long
as the mendicants are seen following them, they can expect growth, not
decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline.
...[934](#endnotes.xhtml_note-934){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-934
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants develop the awakening factors of mindfulness
... investigation of principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility
... immersion ... equanimity, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline.
...[935](#endnotes.xhtml_note-935){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-935
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants develop the perceptions of impermanence ...
not-self ... ugliness ... drawbacks ... giving up ... fading away ...
cessation, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you six principles that prevent decline.
...[936](#endnotes.xhtml_note-936){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-936
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as the mendicants consistently treat their spiritual companions
with bodily kindness ... verbal kindness ... and mental kindness both in
public and in private, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants share without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions,
they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants live according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private---such
precepts as are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion---they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants live according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private---the view that is
noble and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the
complete end of suffering---they can expect growth, not
decline.[937](#endnotes.xhtml_note-937){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-937
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As long as these six principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

And while staying there at the Vulture's Peak the Buddha often gave this
Dhamma talk to the
mendicants:[938](#endnotes.xhtml_note-938){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-938
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and
beneficial.[939](#endnotes.xhtml_note-939){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-939
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When wisdom is imbued with immersion it's
very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind is imbued with wisdom it is
rightly freed from the defilements, namely, the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance."[940](#endnotes.xhtml_note-940){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-940
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the Buddha had stayed in Rājagaha as long as he pleased, he
addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
Ambalaṭṭhikā."[941](#endnotes.xhtml_note-941){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-941
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at Ambalaṭṭhikā, where he stayed in the royal
rest-house. And while staying there, too, he often gave this Dhamma talk
to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

When the Buddha had stayed in Ambalaṭṭhikā as long as he pleased, he
addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to Nāḷandā."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at Nāḷandā, where he stayed in Pāvārika's mango
grove.

### 4. Sāriputta's Lion's Roar {.subheading}

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to
him,[942](#endnotes.xhtml_note-942){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-942
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, I have such confidence in the Buddha
that I believe there's no other ascetic or brahmin---whether past,
future, or present---whose direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha
when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, Sāriputta. You've roared a
definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such confidence in
the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or brahmin---whether
past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is superior to the
Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such teachings, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, Sāriputta, given that you don't comprehend the minds of
Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing, making
such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the
teaching.[943](#endnotes.xhtml_note-943){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-943
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a king's frontier citadel
with fortified embankments, ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And
it has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and intelligent. He keeps
strangers out and lets known people in. As he walks around the patrol
path, he doesn't see a hole or cleft in the wall, not even one big
enough for a cat to slip out. He thinks: 'Whatever sizable creatures
enter or leave the citadel, all of them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'"

And while staying at Nāḷandā, too, the Buddha often gave this Dhamma
talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 5. The Drawbacks of Unethical Conduct {.subheading}

When the Buddha had stayed in Nāḷandā as long as he pleased, he
addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to Pāṭali
Village."[944](#endnotes.xhtml_note-944){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-944
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at Pāṭali Village.

The lay followers of Pāṭali Village heard that he had arrived. So they
went to see him, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir,
please consent to come to our guest house." The Buddha consented with
silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the lay followers of Pāṭali
Village got up from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they went to the guest house,
where they spread carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar,
and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, bowed, stood
to one side, and told him of their preparations, saying: "Please, sir,
come at your convenience."

In the morning, the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went
to the guest house together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed
his feet he entered the guest house and sat against the central column
facing east. The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered
the guest house, and sat against the west wall facing east, with the
Buddha right in front of them. The lay followers of Pāṭali Village also
washed their feet, entered the guest house, and sat against the east
wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of them.

Then the Buddha addressed them:

"Householders, there are these five drawbacks for an unethical person
because of their failure in
ethics.[945](#endnotes.xhtml_note-945){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-945
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five?

Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence.[946](#endnotes.xhtml_note-946){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-946
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first drawback for an unethical
person because of their failure in ethics.

Furthermore, an unethical person gets a bad reputation. This is the
second drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and
embarrassed, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person feels lost when they
die.[947](#endnotes.xhtml_note-947){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-947
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the fourth drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
This is the fifth drawback.

These are the five drawbacks for an unethical person because of their
failure in ethics.

### 6. The Benefits of Ethical Conduct {.subheading}

There are these five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics. What five?

Firstly, an ethical person gains great wealth on account of diligence.
This is the first benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person gets a good reputation. This is the
second benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and
self-assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person dies not feeling lost. This is the fourth
benefit.

Furthermore, when an ethical person's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth
benefit.

These are the five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics."

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the lay followers of Pāṭali Village with a Dhamma talk.
Then he dismissed them, "The night is getting late, householders. Please
go at your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the lay followers of Pāṭali Village. They got up
from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on their right, before leaving. Soon after they left the Buddha entered
a private
cubicle.[948](#endnotes.xhtml_note-948){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-948
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 7. Building a Citadel {.subheading}

Now at that time the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and Vassakāra were
building a citadel at Pāṭali Village to keep the Vajjis
out.[949](#endnotes.xhtml_note-949){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-949
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time thousands of deities were
taking possession of building sites in Pāṭali
Village.[950](#endnotes.xhtml_note-950){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-950
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Illustrious rulers or royal ministers
inclined to build houses at sites possessed by illustrious deities.
Middling rulers or royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites
possessed by middling deities. Lesser rulers or royal ministers inclined
to build houses at sites possessed by lesser deities.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha saw those
deities taking possession of building sites in Pāṭali Village. The
Buddha rose at the crack of dawn and addressed Ānanda, "Ānanda, who is
building a citadel at Pāṭali Village?"

"Sir, the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and Vassakāra are building a
citadel to keep the Vajjis out."

"It's as if they were building the citadel in consultation with the gods
of the thirty-three. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
I saw those deities taking possession of building sites. Illustrious
rulers or royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by
illustrious deities. Middling rulers or royal ministers inclined to
build houses at sites possessed by middling deities. Lesser rulers or
royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by lesser
deities. As far as the civilized region extends, as far as the trading
zone extends, this will be the chief city: the Pāṭaliputta trade
center.[951](#endnotes.xhtml_note-951){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-951
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But Pāṭaliputta will face three threats:
from fire, flood, and
dissension."[952](#endnotes.xhtml_note-952){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-952
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and Vassakāra approached the Buddha,
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, they stood to one side and said, "Would Mister
Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha please accept today's meal
from me?" The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, they went to their own
guest house, where they had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared.
Then they had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, "It's time,
Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to their guest house together with the mendicant Saṅgha, where he
sat on the seat spread out. Then Sunidha and Vassakāra served and
satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with their own hands
with delicious fresh and cooked foods. When the Buddha had eaten and
washed his hand and bowl, Sunidha and Vassakāra took a low seat and sat
to one side.

The Buddha expressed his appreciation with these
verses:[953](#endnotes.xhtml_note-953){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-953
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "In the place he makes his dwelling,\
> having fed the astute\
> and the virtuous here,\
> the restrained spiritual practitioners,
>
> he should dedicate an
> offering[954](#endnotes.xhtml_note-954){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-954
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> to the deities there.\
> Venerated, they venerate him;\
> honored, they honor him.
>
> After that they have sympathy for him,\
> like a mother for the child at her breast.\
> A man beloved of the deities\
> always sees nice
> things."[955](#endnotes.xhtml_note-955){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-955
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Sunidha and Vassakāra
with these verses, he got up from his seat and left.

Sunidha and Vassakāra followed behind the Buddha, thinking, "The gate
through which the ascetic Gotama departs today shall be named the Gotama
Gate. The ford at which he crosses the Ganges River shall be named the
Gotama
Ford."[956](#endnotes.xhtml_note-956){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-956
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the gate through which the Buddha departed was named the Gotama
Gate.

Then the Buddha came to the Ganges River.

Now at that time the Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink
from it. Wanting to cross from the near to the far shore, some people
were seeking a boat, some a dinghy, while some were tying up a
raft.[957](#endnotes.xhtml_note-957){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-957
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But, as easily as a strong person would
extend or contract their arm, the Buddha, together with the mendicant
Saṅgha, vanished from the near shore and landed on the far
shore.[958](#endnotes.xhtml_note-958){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-958
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He saw all those people wanting to cross over. Knowing the meaning of
this, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

> "Those who cross a deluge or
> stream[959](#endnotes.xhtml_note-959){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-959
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> have built a bridge and left the marshes behind.\
> While some people are still tying a raft,\
> intelligent people have crossed over."

The first recitation section.

### 8. Talk on the Noble Truths {.subheading}

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the
village of
Koṭi."[960](#endnotes.xhtml_note-960){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-960
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at the village of Koṭi, and stayed there.

There he addressed the
mendicants:[961](#endnotes.xhtml_note-961){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-961
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four noble
truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very
long time. What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering. These noble truths of suffering, origin,
cessation, and the path have been understood and comprehended. Craving
for continued existence has been cut off; the conduit to rebirth is
ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Because of not truly seeing\
> the four noble truths,\
> we have transmigrated for a long time\
> from one rebirth to the next.
>
> But now that these truths have been seen,\
> the conduit to rebirth is eradicated.\
> The root of suffering is cut off,\
> now there'll be no more future lives."

And while staying at the village of Koṭi, too, the Buddha often gave
this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 9. The Deaths in Ñātika {.subheading}

When the Buddha had stayed in the village of Koṭi as long as he pleased,
he said to Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the land of the
Ñātikas."[962](#endnotes.xhtml_note-962){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-962
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived in the land of the Ñātikas, where he stayed in the
brick house at
Ñātika.[963](#endnotes.xhtml_note-963){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-963
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, the monk named Sāḷha has passed away in
Ñātika. Where has he been reborn in his next
life?[964](#endnotes.xhtml_note-964){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-964
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The nun named Nandā, the layman named
Sudatta, and the laywoman named Sujātā have passed away in Ñātika. Where
have they been reborn in the next
life?[965](#endnotes.xhtml_note-965){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-965
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The laymen named
Kakkaṭa,[966](#endnotes.xhtml_note-966){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-966
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Kaḷibha, Nikata, Kaṭissaha, Tuṭṭha,
Santuṭṭha, Bhadda, and Subhadda have passed away in Ñātika. Where have
they been reborn in the next life?"

"Ānanda, the monk Sāḷha had realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, having realized it with his own
insight due to the ending of defilements.

The nun Nandā had ended the five lower fetters. She's been reborn
spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from
that world.

The layman Sudatta had ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate,
and delusion. He's a once-returner; he will come back to this world once
only, then make an end of suffering.

The laywoman Sujātā had ended three fetters. She's a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

The laymen Kakkaṭa, Kaḷibha, Nikata, Kaṭissaha, Tuṭṭha, Santuṭṭha,
Bhadda, and Subhadda had ended the five lower fetters. They've been
reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to
return from that
world.[967](#endnotes.xhtml_note-967){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-967
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Over fifty laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended the five lower
fetters. They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished
there, not liable to return from that world.

More than ninety laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended three
fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They're once-returners,
who will come back to this world once only, then make an end of
suffering.

More than five hundred laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended
three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for
awakening.[968](#endnotes.xhtml_note-968){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-968
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 10. The Mirror of the Teaching {.subheading}

It's no wonder that a human being should pass away. But if you should
come and ask me about it each and every time someone passes away, that
would be a bother for me.

So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the Dhamma called 'the
mirror of the teaching'. A noble disciple who has this may declare of
themselves:[969](#endnotes.xhtml_note-969){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-969
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what is that mirror of the
teaching?[970](#endnotes.xhtml_note-970){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-970
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha:[971](#endnotes.xhtml_note-971){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-971
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened,
blessed.'[972](#endnotes.xhtml_note-972){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-972
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for
themselves.'[973](#endnotes.xhtml_note-973){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-973
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, sincere,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the
world.'[974](#endnotes.xhtml_note-974){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-974
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones,
unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion.[975](#endnotes.xhtml_note-975){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-975
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This is that mirror of the teaching."

And while staying there in Ñātika the Buddha often gave this Dhamma talk
to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

When the Buddha had stayed in Ñātika as long as he pleased, he addressed
Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to Vesālī."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at Vesālī, where he stayed in Ambapālī's mango
grove.[976](#endnotes.xhtml_note-976){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-976
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, a mendicant should live mindful and
aware.[977](#endnotes.xhtml_note-977){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-977
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is my instruction to you.

And how is a mendicant
mindful?[978](#endnotes.xhtml_note-978){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-978
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[979](#endnotes.xhtml_note-979){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-979
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[980](#endnotes.xhtml_note-980){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-980
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant is mindful.

And how is a mendicant aware? It's when a mendicant acts with
situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead
and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer
robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when
urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping,
waking, speaking, and keeping silent. That's how a mendicant is aware. A
mendicant should live mindful and aware. This is my instruction to you."

### 11. Ambapālī the Courtesan {.subheading}

Ambapālī the courtesan heard that the Buddha had arrived and was staying
in her mango
grove.[981](#endnotes.xhtml_note-981){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-981
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} She had the finest carriages harnessed.
Then she mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages,
set out from Vesālī for her own park. She went by carriage as far as the
terrain allowed, then descended and approached the Buddha on foot. She
bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha educated, encouraged, fired
up, and inspired her with a Dhamma talk.

Then she said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together with the
mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's meal from me." The Buddha
consented with silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented,
Ambapālī got up from her seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on her right, before leaving.

The Licchavis of Vesālī also heard that the Buddha had arrived and was
staying in Ambapālī's mango grove. They had the finest carriages
harnessed. Then they mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out from Vesālī. Some of the Licchavis were in blue, of
blue color, clad in blue, adorned with blue. And some were similarly
colored in yellow, red, or
white.[982](#endnotes.xhtml_note-982){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-982
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Ambapālī the courtesan collided with those Licchavi youths, axle to
axle, wheel to wheel, yoke to
yoke.[983](#endnotes.xhtml_note-983){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-983
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Licchavis said to her, "What, you wench
Ambapālī, are you doing colliding with us axle to axle, wheel to wheel,
yoke to
yoke?"[984](#endnotes.xhtml_note-984){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-984
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well, masters, it's because I've invited the Buddha for tomorrow's meal
together with the mendicant Saṅgha."

"Wench, give us that meal for a hundred thousand!"

"Masters, even if you were to give me Vesālī with her provinces, I still
wouldn't give that meal to
you."[985](#endnotes.xhtml_note-985){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-985
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Licchavis snapped their fingers, saying, "We've been beaten by
the aunty! We've been beaten by the
aunty!"[986](#endnotes.xhtml_note-986){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-986
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then they continued on to Ambapālī's mango
grove.

The Buddha saw them coming off in the distance, and addressed the
mendicants: "Any of the mendicants who've never seen the gods of the
thirty-three, just have a look at the assembly of Licchavis. See the
assembly of Licchavis, check them out: they're just like the
thirty-three!"

The Licchavis went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then
descended and approached the Buddha on foot. They bowed to the Buddha,
sat down to one side, and the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and
inspired them with a Dhamma talk.

Then they said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together with the
mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's meal from us."

Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis, "I have already accepted
tomorrow's meal from Ambapālī the courtesan."

Then the Licchavis snapped their fingers, saying, "We've been beaten by
the aunty! We've been beaten by the aunty!"

And then those Licchavis approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
They got up from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on their right, before leaving.

And when the night had passed Ambapālī had delicious fresh and cooked
foods prepared in her own park. Then she had the Buddha informed of the
time, saying, "Sir, it's time. The meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of Ambapālī together with the mendicant Saṅgha, where
he sat on the seat spread out. Then Ambapālī served and satisfied the
mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with her own hands with delicious
fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hands and bowl, Ambapālī took a
low seat, sat to one side, and said to the Buddha, "Sir, I present this
park to the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the
Buddha."[987](#endnotes.xhtml_note-987){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-987
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Buddha accepted the
park.[988](#endnotes.xhtml_note-988){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-988
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired her with a
Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and left.

And while staying at Vesālī, too, the Buddha often gave this Dhamma talk
to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 12. Commencing the Rains at Beluva {.subheading}

When the Buddha had stayed in Ambapālī's mango grove as long as he
pleased, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the
little village of
Beluva."[989](#endnotes.xhtml_note-989){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-989
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at the little village of Beluva, and stayed there.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, please enter the
rainy season residence with whatever friends or acquaintances you have
around
Vesālī.[990](#endnotes.xhtml_note-990){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-990
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll commence the rainy season residence
right here in the little village of Beluva."

"Yes, sir," those mendicants replied. They did as the Buddha said, while
the Buddha commenced the rainy season residence right there in the
little village of Beluva.

After the Buddha had commenced the rainy season residence, he fell
severely ill, struck by dreadful pains, close to death. But he endured
unbothered, with mindfulness and situational awareness. Then it occurred
to the Buddha, "It would not be appropriate for me to be fully
extinguished before informing my supporters and taking leave of the
mendicant
Saṅgha.[991](#endnotes.xhtml_note-991){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-991
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I forcefully suppress this
illness, stabilize the life force, and live
on?"[992](#endnotes.xhtml_note-992){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-992
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So that is what he did. Then the Buddha's illness died down.

Soon after the Buddha had recovered from that sickness, he came out from
his dwelling and sat in the shade of the porch on the seat spread out.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, it's fantastic that the Buddha is
comfortable and well. Because when the Buddha was sick, my body felt
like it was drugged. I was disorientated, and the teachings weren't
clear to
me.[993](#endnotes.xhtml_note-993){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-993
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Still, at least I was consoled by the
thought that the Buddha won't be fully extinguished without bringing
something up regarding the Saṅgha of
mendicants."[994](#endnotes.xhtml_note-994){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-994
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what could the mendicant Saṅgha expect from me,
Ānanda?[995](#endnotes.xhtml_note-995){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-995
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I've taught the Dhamma without making any
distinction between secret and public
teachings.[996](#endnotes.xhtml_note-996){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-996
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Realized One doesn't have the closed
fist of a tutor when it comes to the
teachings.[997](#endnotes.xhtml_note-997){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-997
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If there's anyone who thinks: 'I shall lead
the mendicant Saṅgha,' or 'the Saṅgha of mendicants is meant for me,'
let them bring something up regarding the Saṅgha. But the Realized One
doesn't think like this, so why should he bring something up regarding
the
Saṅgha?[998](#endnotes.xhtml_note-998){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-998
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I'm now old, elderly and senior. I'm advanced in years and have reached
the final stage of life. I'm currently eighty years old. Just as a
decrepit old cart is kept going by a
rope,[999](#endnotes.xhtml_note-999){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-999
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the same way, the Realized One's body is
kept going as if by a
rope.[1000](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1000){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1000
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sometimes the Realized One, not focusing on
any signs, and with the cessation of certain feelings, enters and
remains in the signless immersion of the heart. Only then does the
Realized One's body become more
comfortable.[1001](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1001){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1001
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So Ānanda, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.[1002](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1002){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1002
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant do this? It's when
a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
That's how a mendicant is their own island, their own refuge, with no
other refuge. That's how the teaching is their island and their refuge,
with no other refuge.

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own
island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as
their island and their refuge, with no other refuge---those mendicants
of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the
best."[1003](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1003){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1003
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The second recitation section.

### 13. An Obvious Hint {.subheading}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, get your sitting
cloth.[1004](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1004){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1004
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let's go to the Cāpāla shrine for the day's
meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla shrine, where he sat on the seat
spread out. Ānanda bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena,
Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Tree-shrines
are all lovely.

Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic
power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated
them, and properly implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of
it.[1005](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1005){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1005
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Realized One has developed and
cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a
basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them.
If he wished, the Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha: "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by
Māra.[1006](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1006){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1006
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time ... And for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:
"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many
Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has
developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power---made them a
vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the
Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha: "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda, "Go now, Ānanda, at
your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

### 14. The Appeal of Māra {.subheading}

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked went up to the
Buddha, stood to one side, and said to
him:[1007](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1007){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1007
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the
Buddha.[1008](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1008){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1008
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked
One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who
are competent, educated, assured, learned, have memorized the teachings,
and practice in line with the teachings. Not until they practice
properly, living in line with the teaching. Not until they've learned
their tradition, and explain, teach, assert, establish, disclose,
analyze, and make it clear. Not until they can legitimately and
completely refute the doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a
demonstrable
basis.'[1009](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1009){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1009
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Today you do have such monk disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned
...'[1010](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1010){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1010
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Today you do have such nun disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have layman disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...'

Today you do have such layman disciples. May the Blessed One now be
fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is
the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have laywoman disciples who are competent,
educated, assured, learned ...'

Today you do have such laywoman disciples. May the Blessed One now be
fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is
the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I will not be fully
extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans.'

Today your spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive,
popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans. May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha."

When this was said, the Buddha said to Māra, "Relax, Wicked One. The
full extinguishment of the Realized One will be
soon.[1011](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1011){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1011
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Three months from now the Realized One will
be fully
extinguished."[1012](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1012){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1012
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 15. Surrendering the Life Force {.subheading}

So at the Cāpāla Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware, surrendered
the life
force.[1013](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1013){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1013
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he did so there was a great
earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the
sky.[1014](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1014){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1014
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then, understanding this matter, on that
occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable `<j>`{=html}with the creation of prolonged
> life,[1015](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1015){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1015
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> the sage surrendered the life
> force.[1016](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1016){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1016
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of
> armor."[1017](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1017){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1017
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 16. The Causes of Earthquakes {.subheading}

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "How incredible, how amazing! That was a
really big earthquake! That was really a very big earthquake;
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! What's the
cause, what's the reason for a great earthquake?"

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "How incredible, sir, how amazing! That was a
really big earthquake! That was really a very big earthquake;
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! What's the
cause, what's the reason for a great earthquake?"

"Ānanda, there are these eight causes and reasons for a great
earthquake. What eight?

This great earth is grounded on water, the water is grounded on air, and
the air stands in space. At a time when a great wind blows, it stirs the
water, and the water stirs the
earth.[1018](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1018){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1018
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

Furthermore, there is an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power who has
achieved mastery of the mind, or a god who is mighty and powerful.
They've developed a limited perception of earth and a limitless
perception of water. They make the earth shake and rock and
tremble.[1019](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1019){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1019
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening passes away from the
host of joyful gods, he's conceived in his mother's belly, mindful and
aware. Then the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles.[1020](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1020){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1020
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the third cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening comes out of his
mother's belly mindful and aware, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles. This is the fourth cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One realizes the supreme perfect
awakening, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles.[1021](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1021){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1021
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the fifth cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles.[1022](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1022){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1022
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the sixth cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One, mindful and aware, surrenders the
life force, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the seventh
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One becomes fully extinguished in the
element of extinguishment with no residue, the earth shakes and rocks
and
trembles.[1023](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1023){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1023
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the eighth cause and reason for a
great earthquake.

These are the eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake.

### 17. Eight Assemblies {.subheading}

There are, Ānanda, these eight
assemblies.[1024](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1024){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1024
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight? The assemblies of aristocrats,
brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the
four great kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An
assembly of Māras. An assembly of
divinities.[1025](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1025){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1025
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. There
I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a
human?'[1026](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1026){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1026
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins ...
householders ... ascetics ... the gods of the four great kings ... the
gods of the thirty-three ... Māras ... divinities. There too I used to
sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my appearance and
voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged, fired up, and
inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they didn't know:
'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when my Dhamma
talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't know: 'Who
was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?'

These are the eight assemblies.

### 18. Eight Dimensions of Mastery {.subheading}

Ānanda, there are these eight dimensions of
mastery.[1027](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1027){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1027
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight?

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both
pretty and
ugly.[1028](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1028){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1028
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and
ugly.[1029](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1029){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1029
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue
appearance.[1030](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1030){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1030
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're like a flax flower that's blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that's
smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. In
the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms
externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Mastering them,
they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form
internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the seventh
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
eighth dimension of mastery.

These are the eight dimensions of mastery.

### 19. The Eight Liberations {.subheading}

Ānanda, there are these eight
liberations.[1031](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1031){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1031
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight?

Having physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. This is the
second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations.

Ānanda, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā
River. Then Māra the wicked approached me, stood to one side, and said:
'Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha.' When he had spoken, I said to Māra:

'Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have monk
disciples ... nun disciples ... layman disciples ... laywoman disciples
who are competent, educated, assured, learned.

I shall not be fully extinguished until my spiritual path is successful
and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed
wherever there are gods and humans.'

Today, just now at the Cāpāla shrine Māra the Wicked approached me once
more with the same request, reminding me of my former statement, and
saying that those conditions had been fulfilled.

When he had spoken, I said to Māra: 'Relax, Wicked One. The full
extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon. Three months from now
the Realized One will be fully extinguished.' So today, just now at the
Cāpāla Tree-shrine, mindful and aware, I surrendered the life force."

### 20. The Appeal of Ānanda {.subheading}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the
Blessed One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain
for the eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people,
out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans."

"Enough now, Ānanda. Do not beg the Realized One. Now is not the time to
beg the Realized One."

For a second time ... For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir,
may the Blessed One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please
remain for the eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the
people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans."

"Ānanda, do you have faith in the Realized One's awakening?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then why do you keep pressing me up to the third time?"

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha:[1032](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1032){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1032
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it.'"

"Do you have faith, Ānanda?"

"Yes, sir."

"Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours alone, the mistake is yours
alone. For even though the Realized One dropped such an obvious hint,
such a clear sign, you didn't beg me to remain for the eon, or what's
left of
it.[1033](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1033){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1033
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you had begged me, I would have refused
you twice, but consented on the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the
misdeed is yours alone, the mistake is yours alone.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.[1034](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1034){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1034
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There I said to you: 'Ānanda, Rājagaha is
lovely, and so is the Vulture's Peak. Whoever has developed and
cultivated the four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a
basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented
them---may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of
it. The Realized One has developed and cultivated the four bases of
psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up,
consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the
Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it.'
But you didn't get it, even though I dropped such an obvious hint, such
a clear sign. You didn't beg me to remain for the eon, or what's left of
it. If you had begged me, I would have refused you twice, but consented
on the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours alone, the
mistake is yours alone.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying right there near Rājagaha, at the
Gotama banyan tree
...[1035](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1035){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1035
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at Bandit's Cliff
...[1036](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1036){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1036
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the Sattapaṇṇi cave on the slopes of
Vebhara
...[1037](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1037){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1037
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili
...[1038](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1038){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1038
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the Cool Grove, under the Snake's Hood
Grotto
...[1039](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1039){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1039
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the Hot Springs Monastery
...[1040](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1040){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1040
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground
...[1041](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1041){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1041
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in Jīvaka's mango grove ... in the
Maddakucchi deer park
...[1042](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1042){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1042
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And in each place I said to you: 'Ānanda, Rājagaha is lovely, and so are
all these places. ... If he wished, the Realized One could live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it.' But you didn't get it, even
though I dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign. You didn't beg
me to remain for the eon, or what's left of it.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying right here near Vesālī, at the Udena
shrine
...[1043](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1043){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1043
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at the Gotamaka shrine
...[1044](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1044){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1044
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at the Seven Maidens shrine
...[1045](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1045){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1045
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at the Many Sons shrine
...[1046](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1046){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1046
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} at the Sārandada shrine
...[1047](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1047){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1047
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and just now, today at the Cāpāla shrine.
There I said to you: 'Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka,
Seven Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Tree-shrines are all
lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic
power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated
them, and properly implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and
cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a
basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them.
If he wished, the Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it.' But you didn't get it, even though I dropped such an
obvious hint, such a clear sign. You didn't beg me to remain for the
eon, or what's left of it, saying: 'Sir, may the Blessed One please
remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the eon! That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans.'

If you had begged me, I would have refused you twice, but consented on
the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours alone, the
mistake is yours alone.

Did I not prepare for this when I explained that we must be parted and
separated from all we hold dear and beloved? How could it possibly be so
that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should
not wear out? The Realized One has discarded, eliminated, released,
given up, relinquished, and surrendered the life force. He has
categorically stated: 'The full extinguishment of the Realized One will
be soon. Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished.' It's not possible for the Realized One, for the sake of
life, to take back the life force once it has been given up like
that.[1048](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1048){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1048
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Come, Ānanda, let's go to the Great Wood, the hall with the peaked
roof."[1049](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1049){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1049
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the hall with the peaked roof, and
said to him, "Go, Ānanda, gather all the mendicants staying in the
vicinity of Vesālī together in the assembly
hall."[1050](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1050){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1050
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked, went up to
him, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the mendicant
Saṅgha has assembled. Please, sir, go at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out and addressed the mendicants:

"So, mendicants, having carefully memorized those things I have taught
you from my direct knowledge, you should cultivate, develop, and make
much of them so that this spiritual practice may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and
humans.[1051](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1051){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1051
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are those things I have taught
from my direct knowledge? They are: the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold
path.[1052](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1052){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1052
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the things I have taught from my direct knowledge. Having
carefully memorized them, you should cultivate, develop, and make much
of them so that this spiritual practice may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Come now, mendicants, I say to you all: 'Conditions fall apart. Persist
with
diligence.'[1053](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1053){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1053
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The full extinguishment of the Realized One
will be soon. Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "I've reached a ripe old
> age,[1054](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1054){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1054
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and little of my life is left.\
> Having given it up, I'll depart;\
> I've made a refuge for myself.
>
> Diligent and mindful,\
> be of good virtues, mendicants!\
> With well-settled
> thoughts,[1055](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1055){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1055
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> take good care of your minds.
>
> Whoever meditates diligently\
> in this teaching and training,\
> giving up transmigration through rebirths,\
> will make an end to suffering."

The third recitation section.

### 21. The Elephant Look {.subheading}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he turned to gaze back at Vesālī, the way that elephants do.
He said to Venerable
Ānanda:[1056](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1056){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1056
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Ānanda, this will be the last time the
Realized One sees Vesālī. Come, Ānanda, let's go to Wares
Village."[1057](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1057){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1057
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants arrived at
Wares Village, and stayed there. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four things,
both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long
time. What four? Noble
ethics,[1058](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1058){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1058
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These noble
ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and
comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the
conduit to rebirth is ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Ethics, immersion, and wisdom,\
> and the supreme freedom:\
> these things have been understood\
> by Gotama the renowned.
>
> And so the Buddha, having
> insight,[1059](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1059){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1059
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> explained this teaching to the mendicants.\
> The teacher made an end of suffering,\
> seeing clearly, he is fully
> quenched."[1060](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1060){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1060
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And while staying there, too, he often gave this Dhamma talk to the
mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 22. The Four Great References {.subheading}

When the Buddha had stayed in Wares Village as long as he pleased, he
addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to Elephant
Village."...[1061](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1061){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1061
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Let's go to Mango
Village."...[1062](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1062){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1062
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Let's go to Black Plum
Village."...[1063](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1063){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1063
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Let's go to Bhoga
City."[1064](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1064){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1064
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at Bhoga City, where he stayed at the Ānanda
shrine.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, I will teach you
the four great
references.[1065](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1065){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1065
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take a mendicant who says: 'Reverend, I have heard and learned this in
the presence of the
Buddha:[1066](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1066){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1066
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's
instruction.'[1067](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1067){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1067
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's
statement.[1068](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1068){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1068
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Instead, having carefully memorized those
words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and
are exhibited in the
training.[1069](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1069){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1069
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the
conclusion:[1070](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1070){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1070
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Clearly this is not the word of the
Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by that mendicant.' And so you
should reject it. If they do fit in the discourse and are exhibited in
the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word
of the Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that mendicant.' You
should remember it. This is the first great
reference.[1071](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1071){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1071
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery lives a
Saṅgha with seniors and
leaders.[1072](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1072){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1072
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I've heard and learned this in the presence
of that Saṅgha: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is the
Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly
this is not the word of the Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by
that Saṅgha.' And so you should reject it. If they do fit in the
discourse and are exhibited in the training, you should draw the
conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Buddha. It has been
correctly memorized by that Saṅgha.' You should remember it. This is the
second great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there are
several senior mendicants who are very learned, inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines.[1073](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1073){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1073
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I've heard and learned this in the presence
of those senior mendicants: this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized
those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse
and are exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse
and are not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion:
'Clearly this is not the word of the Buddha. It has not been correctly
memorized by those senior mendicants.' And so you should reject it. If
they do fit in the discourse and are exhibited in the training, you
should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Buddha. It
has been correctly memorized by those senior mendicants.' You should
remember it. This is the third great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there is a
single senior mendicant who is very learned, an inheritor of the
heritage, who has memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines.[1074](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1074){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1074
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I've heard and learned this in the presence
of that senior mendicant: this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized
those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse
and are exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse
and are not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion:
'Clearly this is not the word of the Buddha. It has been incorrectly
memorized by that senior mendicant.' And so you should reject it. If
they do fit in the discourse and are exhibited in the training, you
should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Buddha. It
has been correctly memorized by that senior mendicant.' You should
remember it. This is the fourth great reference.

These are the four great
references."[1075](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1075){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1075
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And while staying at the Ānanda shrine, too, the Buddha often gave this
Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 23. On Cunda the Smith {.subheading}

When the Buddha had stayed in Bhoga City as long as he pleased, he
addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
Pāvā."[1076](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1076){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1076
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants arrived at
Pāvā,[1077](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1077){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1077
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} where he stayed in Cunda the smith's mango
grove.[1078](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1078){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1078
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Cunda heard that the Buddha had arrived and was staying in his mango
grove. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma
talk.[1079](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1079){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1079
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Cunda said to the Buddha, "Sir, may
the Buddha together with the mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's
meal from me." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Cunda got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right,
before leaving.

And when the night had passed Cunda had delicious fresh and cooked foods
prepared in his own home, and plenty of pork on the turn. Then he had
the Buddha informed of the time,
saying,[1080](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1080){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1080
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, it's time. The meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of Cunda together with the mendicant Saṅgha, where he
sat on the seat spread out and addressed Cunda, "Cunda, please serve me
with the pork on the turn that you've
prepared.[1081](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1081){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1081
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And serve the mendicant Saṅgha with the
other foods."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda, and did as he was asked.

Then the Buddha addressed Cunda, "Cunda, any pork on the turn that's
left over, you should bury it in a pit. I don't see anyone in this
world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---who could properly digest
it except for the Realized One."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda. He did as he was asked, then came back to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then the Buddha educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk, after which
he got up from his seat and left.

After the Buddha had eaten Cunda's meal, he fell severely ill with
bloody dysentery, struck by dreadful pains, close to
death.[1082](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1082){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1082
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But he endured unbothered, with mindfulness
and situational awareness. Then he addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda,
let's go to Kusinārā."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

> I've heard that after
> eating[1083](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1083){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1083
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the meal of Cunda the smith,\
> the attentive one fell severely ill,\
> with pains, close to death.
>
> A severe sickness struck the Teacher\
> who had eaten the pork on the turn.\
> While still purging the Buddha said:\
> "I'll go to the citadel of Kusinārā."

### 24. Bringing a Drink {.subheading}

Then the Buddha left the road and went to the root of a certain tree,
where he addressed Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fold my outer robe in four
and spread it out for me. I am tired and will sit
down."[1084](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1084){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1084
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda, and did as he was asked. The Buddha sat on
the seat spread out.

When he was seated he said to Venerable Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fetch
me some water. I am thirsty and will
drink."[1085](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1085){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1085
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, just now
around five hundred carts have passed by. The shallow water has been
churned up by their wheels, and it flows cloudy and murky. The Kakutthā
river is not far away, with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth
banks, delightful. There the Buddha can drink and cool his
limbs."[1086](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1086){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1086
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time, the Buddha asked Ānanda for a drink, and for a second
time Ānanda suggested going to the Kakutthā river.

And for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fetch
me some water. I am thirsty and will drink."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his bowl he went to the
river.[1087](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1087){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1087
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, though the shallow water in that creek
had been churned up by wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when Ānanda
approached it flowed transparent, clear, and unclouded.

Then Ānanda thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! The Realized One
has such psychic power and might! For though the shallow water in that
creek had been churned up by wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when I
approached it flowed transparent, clear, and unclouded." Gathering a
bowl of drinking water he went back to the Buddha, and said to him,
"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has such psychic
power and might! Just now, though the shallow water in that creek had
been churned up by wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when I
approached it flowed transparent, clear, and unclouded. Drink the water,
Blessed One! Drink the water, Holy One!" So the Buddha drank the water.

### 25. On Pukkusa the Malla {.subheading}

Now at that time Pukkusa the Malla, a disciple of Āḷāra Kālāma, was
traveling along the road from Kusinārā to
Pāvā.[1088](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1088){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1088
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw the Buddha sitting at the root of a
certain tree. He went up to him, bowed, sat down to one side, and said,
"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! Those who have gone forth remain in
such peaceful meditations.

Once it so happened that Āḷāra Kālāma, while traveling along a road,
left the road and sat at the root of a nearby tree for the day's
meditation. Then around five hundred carts passed by right beside Āḷāra
Kālāma.[1089](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1089){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1089
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a certain person coming behind those
carts went up to Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him: 'Sir, didn't you see the
five hundred carts pass
by?'[1090](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1090){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1090
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'No, friend, I didn't see them.'

'But sir, didn't you hear a sound?'

'No, friend, I didn't hear a sound.'

'But sir, were you asleep?'

'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.'

'But sir, were you conscious?'

'Yes, friend.' 'So, sir, while conscious and awake you neither saw nor
heard a sound as five hundred carts passed by right beside you? Why sir,
even your outer robe is covered with
dust!'[1091](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1091){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1091
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, friend.'

Then that person thought: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! Those who
have gone forth remain in such peaceful meditations, in that, while
conscious and awake he neither saw nor heard a sound as five hundred
carts passed by right next to him.' And after declaring his lofty
confidence in Āḷāra Kālāma, he left."

"What do you think, Pukkusa? Which is harder and more challenging to do
while conscious and awake: to neither see nor hear a sound as five
hundred carts pass by right next to you? Or to neither see nor hear a
sound as the heavens are raining and pouring, lightning's flashing, and
thunder's cracking?"

"What do five hundred carts matter, or six hundred, or seven hundred, or
eight hundred, or nine hundred, or a thousand, or even a hundred
thousand carts? It's far harder and more challenging to neither see nor
hear a sound as the heavens are raining and pouring, lightning's
flashing, and thunder's cracking!"

"This one time, Pukkusa, I was staying near Ātumā in a
threshing-hut.[1092](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1092){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1092
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time the heavens were raining and
pouring, lightning was flashing, and thunder was cracking. And not far
from the threshing-hut two farmers who were brothers were killed, as
well as four oxen. Then a large crowd came from Ātumā to the place where
that happened.

Now at that time I came out of the threshing-hut and was walking
mindfully in the open near the door of the hut. Then having left that
crowd, a certain person approached me, bowed, and stood to one side. I
said to them, 'Why, friend, has this crowd gathered?'

'Just now, sir, the heavens were raining and pouring, lightning was
flashing, and thunder was cracking. And two farmers who were brothers
were killed, as well as four oxen. Then this crowd gathered here. But
sir, where were you?'

'I was right here, friend.'

'But sir, did you see?'

'No, friend, I didn't see anything.'

'But sir, didn't you hear a sound?'

'No, friend, I didn't hear a sound.'

'But sir, were you asleep?'

'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.'

'But sir, were you conscious?'

'Yes, friend.'

'So, sir, while conscious and awake you neither saw nor heard a sound as
the heavens were raining and pouring, lightning was flashing, and
thunder was cracking?'

'Yes, friend.'

Then that person thought: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! Those who
have gone forth remain in such peaceful meditations, in that, while
conscious and awake he neither saw nor heard a sound as the heavens were
raining and pouring, lightning was flashing, and thunder was cracking.'
And after declaring their lofty confidence in me, they bowed and
respectfully circled me, keeping me on their right, before leaving."

When he said this, Pukkusa said to him, "Any confidence I had in Āḷāra
Kālāma I sweep away as in a strong wind, or float away as down a swift
stream. Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go
for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.
From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life."

Then Pukkusa addressed a certain man, "Please, my man, fetch a pair of
ready to wear garments the color of mountain
gold."[1093](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1093){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1093
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then Pukkusa
brought the garments to the Buddha, "Sir, please accept this pair of
ready to wear garments the color of mountain gold from me out of
sympathy."

"Well then, Pukkusa, clothe me in one, and Ānanda in the other."

"Yes, sir," replied Pukkusa, and did so.

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Pukkusa the
Malla with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat, bowed,
and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.

Then, not long after Pukkusa had left, Ānanda placed the pair of
garments the color of mountain gold by the Buddha's body. But when
placed by the Buddha's body they seemed to lose their shine. Then Ānanda
said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how pure and
bright is the color of the Realized One's skin. When this pair of ready
to wear garments the color of mountain gold is placed by the Buddha's
body they seem to lose their lustre."

"That's so true, Ānanda, that's so true! There are two times when the
color of the Realized One's skin becomes extra pure and bright. What
two? The night when a Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening; and the night he becomes fully extinguished in the element of
extinguishment with no
residue.[1094](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1094){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1094
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the are two times when the color
of the Realized One's skin becomes extra pure and bright.

Today, Ānanda, in the last watch of the night, between a pair of sal
trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā, shall
be the Realized One's full extinguishment. Come, Ānanda, let's go to the
Kakutthā River."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

> A pair of garments the color of mountain
> gold[1095](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1095){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1095
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> was presented by Pukkusa;\
> when the teacher was clothed with them,\
> his snow gold skin glowed bright.

Then the Buddha together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants went to the
Kakutthā River. He plunged into the river and bathed and drank. And when
he had emerged, he went to the mango grove, where he addressed Venerable
Cundaka,[1096](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1096){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1096
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Please, Cundaka, fold my outer robe in
four and spread it out for me. I am tired and will lie down."

"Yes, sir," replied Cundaka, and did as he was asked. And then the
Buddha laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one
foot on top of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of
getting up. But Cundaka sat down right there in front of the Buddha.

> Having gone to Kakutthā
> Creek,[1097](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1097){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1097
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> whose water was transparent, sweet, and clear,\
> the Teacher, being tired, plunged in,\
> the Realized One, without compare in the world.
>
> And after bathing and drinking the Teacher emerged.\
> Before the group of mendicants, in the middle, `<j>`{=html}the Buddha,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> the Teacher `<j>`{=html}who rolled forth the present
> dispensation,[1098](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1098){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1098
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> the great seer went to the mango grove.
>
> He addressed the mendicant named Cundaka:\
> "Spread out my folded robe so I can lie down."\
> The evolved one urged Cunda,\
> who quickly spread the folded robe.\
> The Teacher lay down so tired,\
> while Cunda sat there before him.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Now it may happen, Ānanda, that someone may give rise to regret in
Cunda the smith: 'It's your loss, respected Cunda, it's your misfortune,
in that the Realized One was fully quenched after eating his last
almsmeal from
you.'[1099](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1099){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1099
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should dispel remorse in Cunda the
smith like this: 'You're fortunate, respected Cunda, you're so very
fortunate, in that the Realized One was fully quenched after eating his
last almsmeal from you. I have heard and learned this in the presence of
the Buddha.

There are two almsmeal offerings that have identical fruit and result,
and are more fruitful and beneficial than other almsmeal
offerings.[1100](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1100){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1100
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What two? The almsmeal after eating which a
Realized One understands the supreme perfect awakening; and the almsmeal
after eating which he becomes fully extinguished in the element of
extinguishment with no residue. These two almsmeal offerings have
identical fruit and result, and are more fruitful and beneficial than
other almsmeal offerings.

You've accumulated a deed that leads to long life, beauty, happiness,
fame, heaven, and
sovereignty.'[1101](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1101){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1101
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how you should dispel remorse in
Cunda the smith."

Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed
this heartfelt sentiment:

> "A giver's merit
> grows;[1102](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1102){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1102
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> enmity doesn't build up when you have self-control.\
> A skillful person gives up bad things---\
> with the end of greed, hate, and delusion, `<j>`{=html}they're
> quenched." `</j>`{=html}

The fourth recitation section.

### 26. The Pair of Sal Trees {.subheading}

Then the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the far shore
of the Golden River, and on to the sal forest of the Mallas at
Upavattana near
Kusinārā."[1103](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1103){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1103
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. And that's where they went. Then the Buddha
addressed Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, set up a cot for me between the twin
sal trees, with my head to the north. I am tired and will lie down."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda, and did as he was asked. And then the Buddha
laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on
top of the other---mindful and
aware.[1104](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1104){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1104
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the twin sal trees were in full blossom with flowers
out of
season.[1105](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1105){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1105
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They sprinkled and bestrewed the Realized
One's body in honor of the Realized One. And the flowers of the heavenly
Flame Tree fell from the sky, and they too sprinkled and bestrewed the
Realized One's body in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly
sandalwood powder fell from the sky, and it too sprinkled and bestrewed
the Realized One's body in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly music
played in midair in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly choirs sang
in midair in honor of the Realized One.

Then the Buddha pointed out to Ānanda what was happening, adding:
"That's not the full extent of how the Realized One is honored,
respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. Any monk or nun or male or
female lay follower who practices in line with the teachings, practicing
properly, living in line with the teachings---they honor, respect,
revere, venerate, and esteem the Realized One with the highest
honor.[1106](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1106){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1106
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So Ānanda, you should train like this: 'We
shall practice in line with the teachings, practicing properly, living
in line with the
teaching.'"[1107](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1107){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1107
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 27. The Monk Upavāna {.subheading}

Now at that time Venerable Upavāna was standing in front of the Buddha
fanning
him.[1108](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1108){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1108
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha made him move, "Move over,
mendicant, don't stand in front of me."

Ānanda thought, "This Venerable Upavāna has been the Buddha's attendant
for a long time, close to him, living in his
presence.[1109](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1109){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1109
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Yet in his final hour the Buddha makes him
move, saying: 'Move over, mendicant, don't stand in front of me.' What
is the cause, what is the reason for this?"

Then Ānanda said to the Buddha, "This Venerable Upavāna has been the
Buddha's attendant for a long time, close to him, living in his
presence. Yet in his final hour the Buddha makes him move, saying: 'Move
over, mendicant, don't stand in front of me.' What is the cause, sir,
what is the reason for this?"

"Most of the deities from ten solar systems have gathered to see the
Realized One. For twelve leagues all around this sal grove there's no
spot, not even a fraction of a hair's tip, that's not crowded full of
illustrious
deities.[1110](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1110){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1110
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The deities are complaining: 'We've come
such a long way to see the Realized One! Only rarely do Realized Ones
arise in the world, perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas. This very
day, in the last watch of the night, the Realized One will be fully
extinguished. And this illustrious mendicant is standing in front of the
Buddha blocking the view. We won't get to see the Realized One in his
final hour!'"

"But sir, what kind of deities are you thinking of?"

"There are, Ānanda, deities---both in space and on the earth---who are
aware of the earth. With hair disheveled and arms raised, they fall down
like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth,
lamenting:[1111](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1111){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1111
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Too soon the Blessed One will be fully
extinguished! Too soon the Holy One will be fully extinguished! Too soon
the Eye of the World will
vanish!'[1112](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1112){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1112
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But the deities who are free of desire endure, mindful and aware,
thinking: 'Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?'"[1113](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1113){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1113
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 28. The Four Inspiring Places {.subheading}

"Previously, sir, when mendicants had completed the rainy season
residence in various districts they came to see the Realized
One.[1114](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1114){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1114
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We got to see the esteemed mendicants, and
to pay homage to
them.[1115](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1115){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1115
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when the Buddha has passed, we won't
get to see the esteemed mendicants or to pay homage to them."

"Ānanda, a faithful gentleman should go to see these four inspiring
places.[1116](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1116){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1116
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? Thinking: 'Here the Realized One
was born!'---that is an inspiring
place.[1117](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1117){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1117
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thinking: 'Here the Realized One became
awakened as a supreme fully awakened Buddha!'---that is an inspiring
place.[1118](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1118){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1118
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thinking: 'Here the supreme Wheel of Dhamma
was rolled forth by the Realized One!'---that is an inspiring
place.[1119](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1119){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1119
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thinking: 'Here the Realized One was fully
quenched in the element of extinguishment with no residue!'---that is an
inspiring
place.[1120](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1120){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1120
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the four inspiring places that a
faithful gentleman should go to see.

Faithful monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will come, and think: 'Here
the Realized One was born!' and 'Here the Realized One became awakened
as a supreme fully awakened Buddha!' and 'Here the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma was rolled forth by the Realized One!' and 'Here the Realized One
was fully quenched in the element of extinguishment with no residue!'
Anyone who passes away while on pilgrimage to these shrines will, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm."

### 29. Ānanda's Questions {.subheading}

"Sir, how do we proceed when it comes to
females?"[1121](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1121){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1121
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Without looking,
Ānanda."[1122](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1122){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1122
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But when looking, how to
proceed?"[1123](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1123){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1123
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Without chatting,
Ānanda."[1124](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1124){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1124
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But when chatting, how to
proceed?"[1125](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1125){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1125
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Be mindful,
Ānanda."[1126](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1126){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1126
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, how do we proceed when it comes to the Realized One's
corpse?"[1127](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1127){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1127
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Don't get involved in the rites for venerating the Realized One's
corpse,
Ānanda.[1128](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1128){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1128
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please, Ānanda, you must all strive and
practice for your own goal! Meditate diligent, keen, and resolute for
your own
goal\![1129](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1129){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1129
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are astute aristocrats, brahmins, and
householders who are devoted to the Realized One. They will perform the
rites for venerating the Realized One's corpse."

"But sir, how to proceed when it comes to the Realized One's corpse?"

"Proceed in the same way as they do for the corpse of a wheel-turning
monarch."

"But how do they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's corpse?"

"They wrap a wheel-turning monarch's corpse with unworn cloth, then with
uncarded cotton, then again with unworn cloth. In this way they wrap the
corpse with five hundred double-layers. Then they place it in an iron
case filled with oil and close it up with another case. Then, having
built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of aromatics, they cremate the
corpse.[1130](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1130){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1130
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They build a monument for the wheel-turning
monarch at the
crossroads.[1131](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1131){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1131
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how they proceed with a
wheel-turning monarch's corpse. Proceed in the same way with the
Realized One's
corpse.[1132](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1132){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1132
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A monument for the Realized One is to be
built at the crossroads. When someone there lifts up garlands or
fragrance or powder, or bows, or inspires confidence in their heart,
that will be for their lasting welfare and happiness.

### 30. Persons Worthy of Monument {.subheading}

Ānanda, these four are worthy of a monument. What four? A Realized One,
a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; an independent Buddha; a
disciple of a Realized One; and a wheel-turning monarch.

And for what reason is a Realized One worthy of a monument? So that many
people will inspire confidence in their hearts, thinking: 'This is the
monument for that Blessed One, perfected and fully awakened!' And having
done so, when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason that a Realized One
is worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is an independent Buddha worthy of a
monument?[1133](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1133){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1133
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that many people will inspire confidence
in their hearts, thinking: 'This is the monument for that independent
Buddha!' And having done so, when their body breaks up, after death,
they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason
that an independent Buddha is worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is a Realized One's disciple worthy of a
monument?[1134](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1134){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1134
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that many people will inspire confidence
in their hearts, thinking: 'This is the monument for that Blessed One's
disciple!' And having done so, when their body breaks up, after death,
they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason
that a Realized One's disciple is worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is a wheel-turning monarch worthy of a monument? So
that many people will inspire confidence in their hearts, thinking:
'This is the monument for that just and principled
king!'[1135](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1135){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1135
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And having done so, when their body breaks
up, after death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It
is for this reason that a wheel-turning monarch is worthy of a monument.

These four are worthy of a monument."

### 31. Ānanda's Incredible Qualities {.subheading}

Then Venerable Ānanda entered a building, and stood there leaning
against the door-jamb and
crying,[1136](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1136){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1136
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Oh! I'm still only a trainee with work
left to do; and my Teacher is about to be fully extinguished, he who is
so kind to
me!"[1137](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1137){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1137
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, where is Ānanda?"

"Sir, Ānanda has entered a dwelling, and stands there leaning against
the door-jamb and crying: 'Oh! I'm still only a trainee with work left
to do; and my Teacher is about to be fully extinguished, he who is so
kind to me!'"

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
Ānanda that the teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Ānanda and said to him,
"Reverend Ānanda, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Ānanda replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Enough, Ānanda! Do not grieve, do not lament. Did I not prepare for
this when I explained
that[1138](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1138){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1138
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} we must be parted and separated from all we
hold dear and beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is born,
created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out, even
the Realized One's body? For a long time, Ānanda, you've treated the
Realized One with deeds of body, speech, and mind that are loving,
beneficial, pleasant, undivided, and
limitless.[1139](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1139){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1139
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You have done good deeds, Ānanda. Devote
yourself to meditation, and you will soon be free of
defilements."[1140](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1140){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1140
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"The Buddhas of the past or the future have attendants who are no better
than Ānanda is for
me.[1141](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1141){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1141
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ānanda is astute, he is intelligent. He
knows the time for monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, king's ministers,
monastics of other religions and their disciples to visit the Realized
One.[1142](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1142){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1142
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are these four incredible and amazing things about
Ānanda.[1143](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1143){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1143
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? If an assembly of monks goes to
see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him
speak. And when he falls silent, they've never had enough. If an
assembly of nuns ... laymen ... or laywomen goes to see Ānanda, they're
uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he
falls silent, they've never had enough. These are the four incredible
and amazing things about Ānanda.

There are these four incredible and amazing things about a wheel-turning
monarch.[1144](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1144){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1144
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? If an assembly of aristocrats
goes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and
uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never
had enough. If an assembly of brahmins ... householders ... or ascetics
goes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and
uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never
had enough.

In the same way, there are those four incredible and amazing things
about Ānanda."

### 32. Teaching the Discourse on Mahāsudassana {.subheading}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, please don't be fully extinguished in this little hamlet, this
jungle hamlet, this branch hamlet. There are other great cities such as
Campā, Rājagaha, Sāvatthī, Sāketa, Kosambī, and
Varanasi.[1145](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1145){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1145
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let the Buddha be fully extinguished there.
There are many well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders there
who are devoted to the Buddha. They will perform the rites of venerating
the Realized One's corpse."

"Don't say that Ānanda! Don't say that this is a little hamlet, a jungle
hamlet, a branch hamlet.

Once upon a time there was a king named Mahāsudassana who was a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extended
to all four sides, he achieved stability in the country, and he
possessed the seven
treasures.[1146](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1146){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1146
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} His capital was this Kusinārā, which at the
time was named
Kusāvatī.[1147](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1147){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1147
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It stretched for twelve leagues from east
to west, and seven leagues from north to
south.[1148](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1148){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1148
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The royal capital of Kusāvatī was
successful, prosperous, populous, full of people, with plenty of food.
It was just like Āḷakamandā, the royal capital of the gods, which is
successful, prosperous, populous, full of spirits, with plenty of
food.[1149](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1149){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1149
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Kusāvatī was never free of ten sounds by
day or night, namely: the sound of elephants, horses, chariots, drums,
clay drums, arched harps, singing, horns, gongs, and handbells; and the
cry: 'Eat, drink, be merry!' as the tenth.

Go, Ānanda, into Kusinārā and inform the Mallas: 'This very day,
Vāseṭṭhas, in the last watch of the night, the Realized One will be
fully
extinguished.[1150](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1150){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1150
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Come forth, Vāseṭṭhas! Come forth,
Vāseṭṭhas! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'The Realized One became
fully extinguished in our own village district, but we didn't get a
chance to see him in his final hour.'"

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Then he robed up and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Kusinārā with a
companion.[1151](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1151){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1151
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 33. The Mallas Pay Homage {.subheading}

Now at that time the Mallas of Kusinārā were sitting together at the
town hall on some
business.[1152](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1152){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1152
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ānanda went up to them, and announced:
"This very day, Vāseṭṭhas, in the last watch of the night, the Realized
One will be fully extinguished. Come forth, Vāseṭṭhas! Come forth,
Vāseṭṭhas! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'The Realized One became
fully extinguished in our own village district, but we didn't get a
chance to see him in his final hour.'"

When they heard what Ānanda had to say, the Mallas, their sons,
daughters-in-law, and wives became distraught, saddened, and
grief-stricken. And some, with hair disheveled and arms raised, falling
down like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented,
"Too soon the Blessed One will be fully extinguished! Too soon the Holy
One will be fully extinguished! Too soon the Eye of the World will
vanish!"

Then the Mallas, their sons, daughters-in-law, and wives, distraught,
saddened, and grief-stricken went to the Mallian sal grove at Upavattana
and approached Ānanda.

Then Ānanda thought, "If I have the Mallas pay homage to the Buddha one
by one, they won't be finished before first light. I'd better separate
them family by family and then have them pay homage, saying: 'Sir, the
Malla named so-and-so with children, wives, retinue, and ministers bows
with his head at your feet.'" And so that's what he did. So by this
means Ānanda got the Mallas to finish paying homage to the Buddha in the
first watch of the night.

### 34. On Subhadda the Wanderer {.subheading}

Now at that time a wanderer named Subhadda was residing near
Kusinārā.[1153](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1153){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1153
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He heard that on that very day, in the last
watch of the night, will be the full extinguishment of the ascetic
Gotama. He thought: "I have heard that brahmins of the past who were
elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'Only rarely do Realized
Ones arise in the world, perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas.' And
this very day, in the last watch of the night, will be the full
extinguishment of the ascetic Gotama. This state of uncertainty has come
up in me. I am quite confident that the Buddha is capable of teaching me
so that I can give up this state of uncertainty."

Then Subhadda went to the Mallian sal grove at Upavattana, approached
Ānanda, and said to him, "Master Ānanda, I have heard that brahmins of
the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'Only
rarely do Realized Ones arise in the world, perfected ones, fully
awakened Buddhas.' And this very day, in the last watch of the night,
will be the full extinguishment of the ascetic Gotama. This state of
uncertainty has come up in me. I am quite confident that the Buddha is
capable of teaching me so that I can give up this state of uncertainty.
Mister Ānanda, please let me see the ascetic Gotama."

When he had spoken, Ānanda said, "Enough, Reverend Subhadda, do not
trouble the Realized One. He is tired."

For a second time, and a third time, Subhadda asked Ānanda, and a third
time Ānanda refused.

The Buddha heard that discussion between Ānanda and Subhadda. He said to
Ānanda, "Enough, Ānanda, don't obstruct Subhadda; let him see the
Realized One. For whatever he asks me, he will only be looking to
understand, not to trouble me. And he will quickly understand any answer
I give to his question."

So Ānanda said to the wanderer Subhadda, "Go, Reverend Subhadda, the
Buddha is making time for you."

Then the wanderer Subhadda went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, there are those ascetics and brahmins who lead an order
and a community, and tutor a community. They're well-known and famous
religious founders, deemed holy by many people. Namely: Pūraṇa Kassapa,
the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, Ajita of the hair blanket, Pakudha
Kaccāyana, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, and the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika
clan. According to their own claims, did all of them have direct
knowledge, or none of them, or only
some?"[1154](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1154){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1154
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Enough, Subhadda, let that
be.[1155](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1155){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1155
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall teach you the Dhamma. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Subhadda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Subhadda, in whatever teaching and training the noble eightfold path is
not found, there is no ascetic found, no second ascetic, no third
ascetic, and no fourth
ascetic.[1156](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1156){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1156
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In whatever teaching and training the noble
eightfold path is found, there is an ascetic found, a second ascetic, a
third ascetic, and a fourth
ascetic.[1157](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1157){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1157
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In this teaching and training the noble
eightfold path is found. Only here is there an ascetic, here a second
ascetic, here a third ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects
are empty of ascetics.

Were these mendicants to practice well, the world would not be empty of
perfected
ones.[1158](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1158){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1158
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> I was twenty-nine years of age,
> Subhadda,[1159](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1159){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1159
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> when I went forth to discover what is
> skillful.[1160](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1160){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1160
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> It's been over fifty years\
> since I went forth.\
> Teacher of the references `<j>`{=html}for the systematic
> teaching:[1161](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1161){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1161
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> outside of here there is no ascetic,

no second ascetic, no third ascetic, and no fourth ascetic. Other sects
are empty of ascetics. Were these mendicants to practice well, the world
would not be empty of perfected ones."

When he had spoken, Subhadda said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made
the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the going
forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

"Subhadda, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take
the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into monkhood. However, I have recognized individual differences in this
matter."

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

Then the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Well then, Ānanda, give Subhadda the
going forth."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

Then Subhadda said to Ānanda, "You're so fortunate, Reverand Ānanda, so
very fortunate, to be anointed here in the Teacher's presence as his
pupil!" And the wanderer Subhadda received the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination,
Venerable Subhadda, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Subhadda became one of the perfected. He
was the last personal disciple of the
Buddha.[1162](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1162){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1162
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The fifth recitation section.

### 35. The Buddha's Last Words {.subheading}

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Ānanda:

"Now, Ānanda, some of you might think: 'The teacher's dispensation has
passed. Now we have no Teacher.' But you should not see it like this.
The teaching and training that I have taught and pointed out for you
shall be your Teacher after my
passing.[1163](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1163){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1163
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After my passing, mendicants ought not address each other as 'reverend',
as they do
today.[1164](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1164){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1164
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A more senior mendicant ought to address a
more junior mendicant by name or clan, or by saying 'reverend'. A more
junior mendicant ought to address a more senior mendicant using 'sir' or
'venerable'.[1165](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1165){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1165
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

If it wishes, after my passing the Saṅgha may abolish the lesser and
minor training
rules.[1166](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1166){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1166
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After my passing, give the divine punishment to the mendicant
Channa."[1167](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1167){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1167
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, what is the divine punishment?"

"Channa may say what he likes, but the mendicants should not correct,
advise, or instruct
him."[1168](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1168){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1168
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Perhaps even a single mendicant
has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
the path, or the practice. So ask, mendicants! Don't regret it later,
thinking: 'We were in the Teacher's presence and we weren't able to ask
the Buddha a question.'"

When this was said, the mendicants kept silent.

For a second time, and a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. So ask,
mendicants! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'We were in the Teacher's
presence and we weren't able to ask the Buddha a question.'"

For a third time, the mendicants kept silent. Then the Buddha said to
the mendicants,

"Mendicants, perhaps you don't ask out of respect for the Teacher. So
let a friend tell a friend."

When this was said, the mendicants kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! I am quite confident that there is not even a single mendicant
in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the
teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice."

"Ānanda, you speak out of faith. But the Realized One knows that there
is not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or
uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or
the practice. Even the last of these five hundred mendicants is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants: "Come now, mendicants, I say to
you all: 'Conditions fall apart. Persist with diligence.'"

These were the Realized One's last
words.[1169](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1169){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1169
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 36. Fully Quenched {.subheading}

Then the Buddha entered the first absorption. Emerging from that, he
entered the second absorption. Emerging from that, he successively
entered into and emerged from the third absorption, the fourth
absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, and the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. Then he entered the cessation of
perception and
feeling.[1170](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1170){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1170
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Anuruddha, "Honorable Anuruddha,
has the Buddha become fully
quenched?"[1171](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1171){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1171
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Reverend Ānanda. He has entered the cessation of perception and
feeling."

Then the Buddha emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling and
entered the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging
from that, he successively entered into and emerged from the dimension
of nothingness, the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension
of infinite space, the fourth absorption, the third absorption, the
second absorption, and the first absorption. Emerging from that, he
successively entered into and emerged from the second absorption and the
third absorption. Then he entered the fourth absorption. Emerging from
that the Buddha immediately became fully extinguished.

When the Buddha was fully quenched, along with the full extinguishment
there was a great earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky. When the Buddha was fully quenched, the
divinity Sahampati recited this verse:

> "All creatures in this
> world[1172](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1172){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1172
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> must lay down this bag of
> bones.[1173](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1173){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1173
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> For even a Teacher such as this,\
> unrivaled in the world,\
> the Realized One, attained to power,\
> the Buddha was fully quenched."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Sakka, lord of gods, recited this
verse:

> "Oh! Conditions are
> impermanent,[1174](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1174){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1174
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> their nature is to rise and fall;\
> having arisen, they cease;\
> their stilling is blissful."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Venerable Anuruddha recited this
verse:

> "There was no more
> breathing[1175](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1175){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1175
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> for the unaffected one of steady heart.\
> Imperturbable, committed to peace,\
> the sage has done his time.
>
> He put up with painful feelings\
> without flinching.\
> The liberation of his heart\
> was like the extinguishing of a lamp."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Venerable Ānanda recited this verse:

> "Then there was
> terror\![1176](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1176){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1176
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Then they had goosebumps!\
> When the Buddha, endowed with all fine qualities,\
> became fully quenched."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, some of the mendicants there who
were not free of desire, with arms raised, falling down like their feet
were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented: "Too soon the
Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy One has become
fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has
vanished!"[1177](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1177){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1177
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the mendicants who were free of desire
endured, mindful and aware, thinking, "Conditions are impermanent. How
could it possibly be otherwise?"

Then Anuruddha addressed the mendicants: "Enough, reverends, do not
grieve or lament. Did the Buddha not prepare us for this when he
explained that we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and
beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is born, created,
conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out? The deities are
complaining."

"But sir, what kind of deities are you thinking of?"

"There are, Ānanda, deities---both in space and on the earth---who are
aware of the earth. With hair disheveled and arms raised, they fall down
like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamenting:
'Too soon the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy
One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has
vanished!' But the deities who are free of desire endure, mindful and
aware, thinking: 'Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?'"

Ānanda and Anuruddha spent the rest of the night talking about Dhamma.

Then Anuruddha said to Ānanda, "Go, Ānanda, into Kusinārā and inform the
Mallas: 'Vāseṭṭhas, the Buddha has become fully quenched. Please come at
your convenience.'"

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Then, in the morning, he robed up and,
taking his bowl and robe, entered Kusinārā with a companion.

Now at that time the Mallas of Kusinārā were sitting together at the
town hall still on the same
business.[1178](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1178){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1178
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ānanda went up to them, and announced,
"Vāseṭṭhas, the Buddha has become fully quenched. Please come at your
convenience."

When they heard what Ānanda had to say, the Mallas, their sons,
daughters-in-law, and wives became distraught, saddened, and
grief-stricken. And some, with hair disheveled and arms raised, falling
down like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented,
"Too soon the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy
One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has
vanished!"

### 37. The Rites of Venerating the Buddha's Corpse {.subheading}

Then the Mallas ordered their men, "So then, my men, collect fragrances
and garlands, and all the musical instruments in Kusinārā."

Then---taking those fragrances and garlands, all the musical
instruments, and five hundred pairs of garments---they went to the
Mallian sal grove at Upavattana and approached the Buddha's corpse. They
spent the day honoring, respecting, revering, and venerating the
Buddha's corpse with dance and song and music and garlands and
fragrances, and making awnings and setting up
pavilions.[1179](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1179){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1179
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then they thought, "It's too late to cremate the Buddha's corpse today.
Let's do it tomorrow." But they spent the next day the same way, and so
too the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
days.[1180](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1180){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1180
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then on the seventh day they thought, "Honoring, respecting, revering,
and venerating the Buddha's corpse with dance and song and music and
garlands and fragrances, let us carry it to the south of the town, and
cremate it there outside the town."

Now at that time eight of the leading Mallas, having bathed their heads
and dressed in unworn clothes,
said,[1181](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1181){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1181
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "We shall lift the Buddha's corpse." But
they were unable to do so.

The Mallas said to Anuruddha, "What is the cause, Honorable Anuruddha,
what is the reason why these eight Mallian chiefs are unable to lift the
Buddha's corpse?"

"Vāseṭṭhas, you have one plan, but the deities have a different one."

"But sir, what is the deities' plan?"

"You plan to carry the Buddha's corpse to the south of the town while
venerating it with dance and song and music and garlands and fragrances,
and cremate it there outside the town. The deities plan to carry the
Buddha's corpse to the north of the town while venerating it with
heavenly dance and song and music and garlands and fragrances. Then they
plan to enter the town by the northern gate, carry it through the center
of the town, leave by the eastern gate, and cremate it there at the
Mallian shrine named
Coronation."[1182](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1182){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1182
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, let it be as the deities plan."

Now at that time the whole of Kusinārā was covered knee-deep with the
flowers of the Flame Tree, without gaps even on the filth and rubbish
heaps.[1183](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1183){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1183
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the deities and the Mallas of Kusinārā
carried the Buddha's corpse to the north of the town while venerating it
with heavenly and human dance and song and music and garlands and
fragrances. Then they entered the town by the northern gate, carried it
through the center of the town, left by the eastern gate, and deposited
the corpse there at the Mallian shrine named Coronation.

Then the Mallas said to Ānanda, "Honorable Ānanda, how do we proceed
when it comes to the Realized One's corpse?"

"Proceed in the same way as they do for the corpse of a wheel-turning
monarch."

"But how do they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's corpse?"

"They wrap a wheel-turning monarch's corpse with unworn cloth, then with
uncarded cotton, then again with unworn cloth. In this way they wrap the
corpse with five hundred double-layers. Then they place it in an iron
case filled with oil and close it up with another case. Then, having
built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of aromatics, they cremate the
corpse. They build a monument for the wheel-turning monarch at the
crossroads. That's how they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's
corpse. Proceed in the same way with the Realized One's corpse. A
monument for the Realized One is to be built at the crossroads. When
someone there lifts up garlands or fragrance or powder, or bows, or
inspires confidence in their heart, that will be for their lasting
welfare and happiness."

Then the Mallas ordered their men, "So then, my men, collect uncarded
cotton."

So the Mallas wrapped the Buddha's corpse, and placed it in an iron case
filled with oil. Then, having built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of
aromatics, they lifted the corpse on to the pyre.

### 38. Mahākassapa's Arrival {.subheading}

Now at that time Venerable Mahākassapa was traveling along the road from
Pāvā to Kusinārā together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants.[1184](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1184){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1184
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he left the road and sat at the root
of a tree.

Now at that time a certain Ājīvaka ascetic had picked up a Flame Tree
flower in Kusinārā and was traveling along the road to
Pāvā.[1185](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1185){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1185
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mahākassapa saw him coming off in the
distance and said to him, "Reverend, might you know about our Teacher?"

"Yes, reverend. Seven days ago the ascetic Gotama was fully quenched.
From there I picked up this Flame Tree flower." Some of the mendicants
there who were not free of desire, with arms raised, falling down like
their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented, "Too soon
the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy One has
become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has vanished!" But
the mendicants who were free of desire endured, mindful and aware,
thinking, "Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?"

Now at that time a monk named Subhadda, who had gone forth when old, was
sitting in that assembly. He said to those mendicants, "Enough,
reverends, do not grieve or lament. We're well rid of that Great
Ascetic. And we are
oppressed:[1186](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1186){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1186
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is allowable for you; this is not
allowable for you.' Well, now we shall do what we want and not do what
we don't want."

Then Venerable Mahākassapa addressed the mendicants, "Enough, reverends,
do not grieve or lament. Did the Buddha not prepare us for this when he
explained that we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and
beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is born, created,
conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out, even the
Realized One's body?"

Now at that time four of the leading Mallas, having bathed their heads
and dressed in unworn clothes, said, "We shall light the Buddha's
funeral pyre." But they were unable to do so.

The Mallas said to Anuruddha, "What is the cause, Venerable Anuruddha,
what is the reason why these four Mallian chiefs are unable to light the
Buddha's funeral pyre?"

"Vāseṭṭhas, the deities have a different plan."

"But sir, what is the deities' plan?"

"The deities' plan is this: Venerable Mahākassapa is traveling along the
road from Pāvā to Kusinārā together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants. The Buddha's funeral pyre shall not burn until he bows with
his head at the Buddha's feet."

"Sir, let it be as the deities plan."

Then Venerable Mahākassapa arrived at the Mallian shrine named
Coronation at Kusinārā and approached the Buddha's funeral pyre.
Arranging his robe over one shoulder and raising his joined palms, he
respectfully circled the Buddha three times, keeping him on his right,
and bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet. And the five hundred
mendicants did likewise. And when Mahākassapa and the five hundred
mendicants bowed the Buddha's funeral pyre burst into flames all by
itself.

And when the Buddha's corpse was cremated no ash or soot was found from
outer or inner skin, flesh, sinews, or synovial fluid. Only the relics
remained.[1187](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1187){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1187
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like when ghee or oil blaze and burn,
and neither ashes nor soot are found. In the same way, when the Buddha's
corpse was cremated no ash or soot was found from outer or inner skin,
flesh, sinews, or synovial fluid. Only the relics remained. And of those
five hundred pairs of garments only two were not burnt: the innermost
and the outermost. But when the Buddha's corpse was consumed the funeral
pyre was extinguished by a stream of water that appeared in the
sky,[1188](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1188){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1188
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} by water dripping from the sal trees, and
by the Mallas' fragrant water.

Then the Mallas made a cage of spears for the Buddha's relics in the
town hall and surrounded it with a buttress of bows. For seven days they
honored, respected, revered, and venerated them with dance and song and
music and garlands and fragrances.

### 39. Distributing the Relics {.subheading}

King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha,
heard[1189](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1189){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1189
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. He sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha was
an aristocrat and so am I. I too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics.
I will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."[1190](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1190){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1190
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Licchavis of Vesālī also heard that the Buddha had become fully
quenched at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The
Buddha was an aristocrat and so are we. We too deserve a share of the
Buddha's relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a
memorial service."

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also heard that the Buddha had become fully
quenched at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The
Buddha was our foremost relative. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

The Bulis of Allakappa also
heard[1191](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1191){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1191
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha
was an aristocrat and so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

The Koliyans of Rāmagāma also
heard[1192](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1192){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1192
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha
was an aristocrat and so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

The brahmin of Veṭhadīpa also
heard[1193](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1193){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1193
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. He sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha was
an aristocrat and I am a brahmin. I too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. I will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

The Mallas of Pāvā also heard that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha
was an aristocrat and so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

When they had spoken, the Mallas of Kusinārā said to those various
groups: "The Buddha was fully quenched in our village district. We will
not give away a share of his
relics."[1194](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1194){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1194
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Doṇa the brahmin said to those various
groups:[1195](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1195){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1195
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "Hear, sirs, a single word from me.\
> Our Buddha's teaching was acceptance.\
> It would not be good to fight
> over[1196](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1196){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1196
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> a share of the supreme person's relics.
>
> Let us make eight portions, good sirs,\
> rejoicing in unity and harmony.\
> Let there be monuments far and
> wide,[1197](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1197){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1197
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> so many folk may gain faith in the Clear-eyed One!"

"Well then, brahmin, you yourself should fairly divide the Buddha's
relics in eight portions."

"Yes, sirs," replied Doṇa to those various groups. He divided the relics
as asked and said to them, "Sirs, please give me the urn, and I shall
build a monument for it and conduct a memorial service." So they gave
Doṇa the urn.

The Moriyas of Pippalivana
heard[1198](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1198){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1198
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Buddha had become fully quenched
at Kusinārā. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of Kusinārā: "The Buddha
was an aristocrat, and so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's
relics. We will build a monument for them and conduct a memorial
service."

"There is no portion of the Buddha's relics left, they have already been
portioned out. Here, take the embers." So they took the embers.

### 40. Venerating the Relics {.subheading}

Then King Ajātasattu of
Magadha,[1199](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1199){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1199
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the Licchavis of Vesālī, the Sakyans of
Kapilavatthu, the Bulis of Allakappa, the Koliyans of Rāmagāma, the
brahmin of Veṭhadīpa, the Mallas of Pāvā, the Mallas of Kusinārā, the
brahmin Doṇa, and the Moriyas of Pippalivana built monuments for them
and conducted memorial services. Thus there were eight monuments for the
relics, a ninth for the urn, and a tenth for the embers. That is how it
was in the old
days.[1200](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1200){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1200
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> There were eight shares `<j>`{=html}of the Clear-eyed One's
> relics.[1201](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1201){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1201
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> Seven were worshipped in the Black Plum Tree Land.\
> But one share of the most excellent of men\
> was worshipped in Rāmagāma by a dragon king.
>
> One tooth is venerated `<j>`{=html}by the gods of the Three and
> Thirty, `</j>`{=html}\
> and one is worshipped in the city of Gandhāra;\
> another one in the realm of the Kaliṅga King,\
> and one is worshipped by a dragon king.
>
> Through their glory this rich earth\
> is adorned with the best of
> offerings.[1202](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1202){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1202
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Thus the Clear-eyed One's corpse\
> is well honored by the honorable.
>
> It's venerated by lords of gods, dragons, and spirits;\
> and likewise venerated by the finest lords of men.\
> Honor it with joined palms when you get the chance,\
> for a Buddha is rare even in a hundred eons.
>
> Altogether forty even teeth,\
> and the body hair and head hair,\
> were carried off individually by gods\
> across the universe.

</article>
<article id="dn17">

## [DN 17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [King Mahāsudassana ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsudassanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying between a
pair of sal trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near
Kusinārā at the time of his full
extinguishment.[1203](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1203){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1203
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, please don't be fully extinguished in this
little hamlet, this jungle hamlet, this branch hamlet. There are other
great cities such as Campā, Rājagaha, Sāvatthī, Sāketa, Kosambī, and
Varanasi. Let the Buddha be fully extinguished there. There are many
well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders there who are devoted
to the Buddha. They will perform the rites of venerating the Realized
One's corpse."

"Don't say that, Ānanda! Don't say that this is a little hamlet, a
jungle hamlet, a branch hamlet.

### 1. The Capital City of Kusāvatī {.subheading}

Once upon a time there was a king named Mahāsudassana whose dominion
extended to all four sides, and who achieved stability in the country.
His capital was this Kusinārā, which at the time was named Kusāvatī. It
stretched for twelve leagues from east to west, and seven leagues from
north to south. The royal capital of Kusāvatī was successful,
prosperous, populous, full of people, with plenty of food. It was just
like Āḷakamandā, the royal capital of the gods, which is successful,
prosperous, populous, full of spirits, with plenty of food.

Kusāvatī was never free of ten sounds by day or night, namely: the sound
of elephants, horses, chariots, drums, clay drums, arched harps,
singing, horns, gongs, and handbells; and the cry, 'Eat, drink, be
merry!' as the tenth.

Kusāvatī was encircled by seven
ramparts:[1204](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1204){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1204
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} one made of gold, one made of silver, one
made of beryl, one made of crystal, one made of ruby, one made of
emerald, and one made of all precious things.

It had four gates, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. At each
gate there were seven pillars, three fathoms deep and four fathoms
high,[1205](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1205){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1205
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} made of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, ruby,
emerald, and all precious things.

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees, made of gold, silver,
beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things. The golden palms
had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver. The silver palms
had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. The beryl palms had
trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal. The crystal palms had
trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. The ruby palms had
trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald. The emerald palms had
trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby. The palms of all
precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits
of all precious things. When those rows of palm trees were blown by the
wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and
intoxicating, like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had
practiced well and kept excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or
drunkards in Kusāvatī at that time were entertained by that
sound.[1206](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1206){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1206
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. The Seven Treasures {.subheading}

#### 2.1. The Wheel-Treasure {.subheading}

King Mahāsudassana possessed seven treasures and four blessings. What
seven?

On a fifteenth day sabbath, King Mahāsudassana had bathed his head and
gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the
sabbath.[1207](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1207){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1207
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to
him, with a thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every
detail.[1208](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1208){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1208
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing this, the king thought, 'I have
heard that when the heavenly wheel-treasure appears to a king in this
way, he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning
monarch?'

Then King Mahāsudassana, rising from his seat and arranging his robe
over one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and
besprinkled the wheel-treasure with his right hand,
saying:[1209](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1209){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1209
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Roll forth, O wheel-treasure! Triumph, O
wheel-treasure!'

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed
it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with
his
army.[1210](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1210){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1210
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to him and said,
'Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king,
instruct us.'

The king said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not
commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the
current level of
taxation.'[1211](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1211){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1211
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so the opposing rulers of the eastern
quarter became his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolled towards the south.
...[1212](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1212){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1212
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Having plunged into the southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the west. ...

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four
divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the
king came to stay together with his army.

And any opposing rulers of the northern quarter came to him and said,
'Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king,
instruct us.'

The king said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not
commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the
current level of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the northern
quarter became his
vassals.[1213](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1213){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1213
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the
gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle,
illuminating the royal
compound.[1214](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1214){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1214
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is the wheel-treasure that appeared to
King Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.2. The Elephant-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the elephant-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. It was an
all-white sky-walker with psychic power, touching the ground in seven
places, a king of elephants named
Sabbath.[1215](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1215){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1215
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing him, the king was impressed, 'This
would truly be a fine elephant vehicle, if he would submit to taming.'
Then the elephant-treasure submitted to taming, as if he was a fine
thoroughbred elephant that had been tamed for a long time.

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same
elephant-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land
surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for
breakfast. Such is the elephant-treasure that appeared to King
Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.3. The Horse-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the horse-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. It was an
all-white sky-walker with psychic power, with head of black and mane
like woven reeds, a royal steed named
Thundercloud.[1216](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1216){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1216
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing him, the king was impressed, 'This
would truly be a fine horse vehicle, if he would submit to taming.' Then
the horse-treasure submitted to taming, as if he was a fine thoroughbred
horse that had been tamed for a long time.

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same
horse-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land
surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for
breakfast. Such is the horse-treasure that appeared to King
Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.4. The Jewel-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the jewel-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. It was a beryl
gem that was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked,
transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. And
the radiance of that jewel spread all-round for a league.

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same
jewel-treasure, mobilized his army of four divisions and, with the jewel
hoisted on his banner, set out in the dark of the night. Then the
villagers around them set off to work, thinking that it was day. Such is
the jewel-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.5. The Woman-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the woman-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. She was
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. She was neither
too tall nor too short; neither too thin nor too fat; neither too dark
nor too light. She outdid human beauty without reaching heavenly beauty.
And her touch was like a tuft of cotton-wool or kapok. When it was cool
her limbs were warm, and when it was warm her limbs were cool. The
fragrance of sandal floated from her body, and lotus from her mouth. She
got up before the king and went to bed after him, and was obliging,
behaving nicely and speaking politely. The woman-treasure did not betray
the wheel-turning monarch even in thought, still less in deed. Such is
the woman-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.6. The Householder-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the householder-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. The power
of clairvoyance manifested in him as a result of past deeds, by which he
sees hidden treasure, both owned and ownerless.

He approached the king and said, 'Relax, sire. I will take care of the
treasury.'

Once it so happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same
householder-treasure, boarded a boat and sailed to the middle of the
Ganges river. Then he said to the householder-treasure, 'Householder, I
need gold, both coined and uncoined.'

'Well then, great king, draw the boat up to one shore.'

'It's right here, householder, that I need gold, both coined and
uncoined.'

Then that householder-treasure, immersing both hands in the water,
pulled up a pot full of gold, both coined and uncoined, and said to the
king, 'Is this sufficient, great king? Has enough been done, great king,
enough offered?'

The king said, 'That is sufficient, householder. Enough has been done,
enough offered.'

Such is the householder-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

#### 2.7. The Commander-Treasure {.subheading}

Next, the commander-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana. He was
astute, competent, intelligent, and capable of getting the king to
appoint who should be appointed, dismiss who should be dismissed, and
retain who should be
retained.[1217](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1217){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1217
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He approached the king and said, 'Relax, sire. I shall issue
instructions.'

Such is the commander-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

These are the seven treasures possessed by King Mahāsudassana.

### 3. The Four Blessings {.subheading}

King Mahāsudassana possessed four blessings. And what are the four
blessings?

He was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty, more so
than other people. This is the first blessing.

Furthermore, he was long-lived, more so than other people. This is the
second blessing.

Furthermore, he was rarely ill or unwell, and his stomach digested well,
being neither too hot nor too cold, more so than other people. This is
the third blessing.

Furthermore, he was as dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders
as a father is to his children. And the brahmins and householders were
as dear to the king as children are to their father.

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana went with his army of four
divisions to visit a park. Then the brahmins and householders went up to
him and said, 'Slow down, Your Majesty, so we may see you longer!' And
the king addressed his charioteer, 'Drive slowly, charioteer, so I can
see the brahmins and householders longer!' This is the fourth blessing.

These are the four blessings possessed by King Mahāsudassana.

### 4. Lotus Ponds in the Palace of Principle {.subheading}

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I have lotus ponds built
between the palms, at intervals of a hundred bow lengths?'

So that's what he did. The lotus ponds were lined with tiles of four
colors, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

And four flights of stairs of four colors descended into each lotus
pond, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had
posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver. The silver stairs
had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs
had posts of beryl, and banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal
stairs had posts of crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl. Those
lotus ponds were surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver.
The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of
silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and
finials of gold.

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I plant flowers in the lotus
ponds such as blue water lilies, and lotuses of pink, yellow, and white,
blooming all year round, and accessible to the public?' So that's what
he did.

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I appoint bath attendants to
help bathe the people who come to bathe in the lotus ponds?' So that's
what he did.

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I set up charities on the
banks of the lotus ponds, so that those in need of food, drink, clothes,
vehicles, beds, women, coined gold, or uncoined gold can get what they
need?'[1218](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1218){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1218
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what he did.

Then the brahmins and householders came to the king bringing abundant
wealth and
said,[1219](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1219){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1219
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sire, this abundant wealth is specially
for you alone; may Your Highness accept it!'

'There's enough raised for me through regular taxes. Let this be for
you; and here, take even more!'

When the king turned them down, they withdrew to one side to think up a
plan, 'It wouldn't be proper for us to take this abundant wealth back to
our own homes. Why don't we build a home for King Mahāsudassana?'

They went up to the king and said, 'We shall have a home built for you,
sire!' King Mahāsudassana consented with silence.

And then Sakka, lord of gods, knowing the king's train of thought,
addressed the god Vissakamma, 'Come, dear Vissakamma, build a palace
named Principle as a home for King
Mahāsudassana.'[1220](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1220){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1220
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, lord,' replied Vissakamma. Then, as easily as a strong person
would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the gods of the
thirty-three and appeared in front of King Mahāsudassana.

Vissakamma said to the king, 'I shall build a palace named Principle as
a home for you, sire.' King Mahāsudassana consented with silence.

And so that's what Vissakamma did.

The Palace of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and
half a league from north to south. It was lined with tiles of four
colors, three fathoms high, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had 84,000 pillars of four colors, made of gold, silver, beryl, and
crystal. It was covered with panels of four colors, made of gold,
silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors, made of gold, silver,
beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters
and finials of silver. The silver stairs had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and
banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal stairs had posts of
crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

It had 84,000 chambers of four
colors,[1221](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1221){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1221
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.
In each chamber a couch was spread: in the golden chamber a couch of
silver; in the silver chamber a couch of gold; in the beryl chamber a
couch of ivory; in the crystal chamber a couch of hardwood. At the door
of the golden chamber stood a palm tree of silver, with trunk of silver,
and leaves and fruits of gold. At the door of the silver chamber stood a
palm tree of gold, with trunk of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver.
At the door of the beryl chamber stood a palm tree of crystal, with
trunk of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. At the door of the
crystal chamber stood a palm tree of beryl, with trunk of beryl, and
leaves and fruits of crystal.

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I build a grove of golden
palm trees at the door to the great foyer, where I can sit for the day?'
So that's what he did.

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold
and silver. The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and
finials of silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold.

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two nets of bells, made of
gold and silver. The golden net had bells of silver, and the silver net
had bells of gold. When those nets of bells were blown by the wind they
sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating, like
a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had practiced well and kept
excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or drunkards in Kusāvatī
at that time were entertained by that sound. When it was finished, the
palace was hard to look at, dazzling to the eyes. It was like how in the
last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the heavens are clear
and cloudless, as the sun is rising to the firmament, it is hard to look
at, dazzling to the eyes.

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Why don't I build a lotus pond named
Principle in front of the palace?' So that's what he did. The Lotus Pond
of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and half a league
from north to south. It was lined with tiles of four colors, made of
gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors, made of gold, silver,
beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters
and finials of silver. The silver stairs had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and
banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal stairs had posts of
crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

It was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver. The
golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of
silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and
finials of gold.

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees, made of gold, silver,
beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things. The golden palms
had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver. The silver palms
had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. The beryl palms had
trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal. The crystal palms had
trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. The ruby palms had
trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald. The emerald palms had
trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby. The palms of all
precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits
of all precious things. When those rows of palm trees were blown by the
wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and
intoxicating, like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had
practiced well and kept excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or
drunkards in Kusāvatī at that time were entertained by that sound.

When the palace and its lotus pond were finished, King Mahāsudassana
served those who were deemed true ascetics and brahmins with all they
desired. Then he ascended the Palace of Principle.

The first recitation section.

### 5. Attaining Absorption {.subheading}

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'Of what deed of mine is this the fruit
and result, that I am now so mighty and powerful?'

Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'It is the fruit and result of three
kinds of
deeds:[1222](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1222){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1222
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} giving, self-control, and restraint.'

Then he went to the great foyer, stood at the door, and expressed this
heartfelt
sentiment:[1223](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1223){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1223
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Stop here, sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts---[1224](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1224){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1224
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} no further!'

Then he entered the great foyer and sat on the golden couch. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[1225](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1225){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1225
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected were stilled, he entered and remained in the second
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with
internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping
it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, he entered and
remained in the third absorption, where he meditated with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, he entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

Then King Mahāsudassana left the great foyer and entered the golden
chamber, where he sat on the golden couch. He meditated spreading a
heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way he spread a heart full of love
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, to everyone in the
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. He
meditated spreading a heart full of compassion ... He meditated
spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... He meditated spreading a heart
full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.

### 6. Of All Cities {.subheading}

King Mahāsudassana had 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī
foremost. He had 84,000 palaces, with the Palace of Principle foremost.
He had 84,000 chambers, with the great foyer foremost. He had 84,000
couches made of gold, silver, ivory, and hardwood. They were spread with
woollen covers---shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with
flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
pillows at both
ends.[1226](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1226){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1226
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had 84,000 bull elephants with gold
adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal
bull elephant named Sabbath foremost. He had 84,000 horses with gold
adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal
steed named Thundercloud foremost. He had 84,000 chariots upholstered
with the hide of lions, tigers, and leopards, and cream rugs, with gold
adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the chariot
named Triumph
foremost.[1227](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1227){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1227
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had 84,000 jewels, with the
jewel-treasure foremost. He had 84,000 women, with Queen Subhaddā
foremost. He had 84,000 householders, with the householder-treasure
foremost. He had 84,000 aristocrat vassals, with the commander-treasure
foremost. He had 84,000 milk-cows with silken reins and bronze
pails.[1228](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1228){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1228
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had 8,400,000,000 fine cloths of linen,
cotton, silk, and wool. He had 84,000 servings of food, which were
presented to him as offerings in the morning and evening.

Now at that time his 84,000 royal elephants came to attend on him in the
morning and evening. Then King Mahāsudassana thought, 'What if instead
half of the elephants took turns to attend on me at the end of each
century?'[1229](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1229){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1229
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He instructed the commander-treasure to do
this, and so it was done.

### 7. The Visit of Queen Subhaddā {.subheading}

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, Queen Subhaddā thought, 'It is long since I have seen the king.
Why don't I go to see him?'

So the queen addressed the ladies of the harem, 'Come, bathe your heads
and dress in yellow. It is long since we saw the king, and we shall go
to see him.'

'Yes, ma'am,' replied the ladies of the harem. They did as she asked and
returned to the queen.

Then the queen addressed the commander-treasure, 'Dear
commander-treasure, please ready the army of four divisions. It is long
since we saw the king, and we shall go to see him.'

'Yes, my queen,' he replied, and did as he was asked. He informed the
queen, 'My queen, the army of four divisions is ready, please go at your
convenience.'

Then Queen Subhaddā together with the ladies of the harem went with the
army to the Palace of Principle. She ascended the palace and went to the
great foyer, where she stood leaning against a
door-post.[1230](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1230){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1230
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Hearing them, the king thought, 'What's that, it sounds like a big
crowd!' Coming out of the foyer he saw Queen Subhaddā leaning against a
door-post and said to her, 'Please stay there, my queen, don't enter in
here.'[1231](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1231){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1231
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then he addressed a certain man, 'Come, mister, bring the golden couch
from the great foyer and set it up in the golden palm grove.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' that man replied, and did as he was asked. The king
laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on
top of the other---mindful and aware.

Then Queen Subhaddā thought, 'The king's faculties are so very clear,
and the complexion of his skin is pure and bright. Let him not pass
away!' She said to
him,[1232](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1232){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1232
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the
royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost. Arouse desire for these! Take an
interest in
life!'[1233](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1233){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1233
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And she likewise urged the king to live on by taking an interest in all
his possessions as described above.

When the queen had spoken, the king said to her, 'For a long time, my
queen, you have spoken to me with words that are welcome, desirable,
agreeable, and pleasant. And yet in my final hour, your words are
unwelcome, undesirable, disagreeable, and
unpleasant!'[1234](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1234){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1234
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Then how exactly, Your Majesty, am I to speak to you?'

'Like this, my queen: "Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we
hold dear and beloved. Don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is
suffering, and it's
criticized.[1235](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1235){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1235
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the
royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost. Give up desire for these! Take no
interest in life!"' And so on for all the king's possessions.

When the king had spoken, Queen Subhaddā cried and burst out in
tears.[1236](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1236){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1236
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Wiping away her tears, the queen said to
the king: 'Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear
and beloved. Don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering,
and it's criticized. Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the royal
capital of Kusāvatī foremost. Give up desire for these! Take no interest
in life!' And she continued, listing all the king's possessions.

### 8. Rebirth in the Realm of Divinity {.subheading}

Not long after that, King Mahāsudassana passed away. And the feeling he
had close to death was like a householder or their child falling asleep
after eating a delectable
meal.[1237](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1237){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1237
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he passed away King Mahāsudassana was reborn in a good place, a
realm of divinity. Ānanda, King Mahāsudassana played children's games
for 84,000 years. He ruled as viceroy for 84,000 years. He ruled as king
for 84,000 years. He led the spiritual life as a layman in the Palace of
Principle for 84,000 years. And having developed the four divine
meditations, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a
good place, a realm of divinity.

Now, Ānanda, you might think: 'Surely King Mahāsudassana must have been
someone else at that time?' But you should not see it like that. I
myself was King Mahāsudassana at that
time.[1238](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1238){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1238
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mine were the 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī
foremost. And mine were all the other possessions.

Of those 84,000 cities, I only stayed in one, the capital Kusāvatī. Of
those 84,000 mansions, I only dwelt in one, the Palace of Principle. Of
those 84,000 chambers, I only dwelt in the great foyer. Of those 84,000
couches, I only used one, made of gold or silver or ivory or heartwood.
Of those 84,000 bull elephants, I only rode one, the royal bull elephant
named Sabbath. Of those 84,000 horses, I only rode one, the royal horse
named Thundercloud. Of those 84,000 chariots, I only rode one, the
chariot named Triumph. Of those 84,000 women, I was only served by one,
a maiden of the aristocratic or peasant
classes.[1239](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1239){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1239
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Of those 8,400,000,000 cloths, I only wore
one pair, made of fine linen, cotton, silk, or wool. Of those 84,000
servings of food, I only had one, eating at most a cup of rice with
suitable sauce.

See, Ānanda! All those conditioned phenomena have passed, ceased, and
perished. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable are conditions, so
unreliable are conditions. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Six times, Ānanda, I recall having laid down my body at this place. And
the seventh time was as a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled
king, at which time my dominion extended to all four sides, I achieved
stability in the country, and I possessed the seven treasures. But
Ānanda, I do not see any place in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans where the Realized One would lay down his body for the eighth
time."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Oh! Conditions are impermanent,\
> their nature is to rise and fall;\
> having arisen, they cease;\
> their stilling is blissful."

</article>
<article id="dn18">

## [DN 18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Janavasabha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Janavasabhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. Declaring the Rebirths of People From Ñātika and Elsewhere {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika
in the brick
house.[1240](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1240){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1240
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the Buddha was explaining the rebirths of devotees all
over the nations; the Kāsis and Kosalans, Vajjis and Mallas, Cetīs and
Vacchas, Kurus and Pañcālas, Macchas and
Sūrasenas:[1241](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1241){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1241
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This one was reborn here, while that one was reborn there.

Over fifty devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended the five
lower fetters. They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be
extinguished there, not liable to return from that
world.[1242](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1242){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1242
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

More than ninety devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended three
fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They're once-returners,
who will come back to this world once only, then make an end of
suffering.

More than five hundred devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended
three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening."

When the devotees of Ñātika heard about the Buddha's answers to those
questions, they became uplifted and overjoyed, full of rapture and
happiness.

Venerable Ānanda heard of the Buddha's statements and the Ñātikans'
happiness.

### 2. Ānanda's Suggestion {.subheading}

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "But there were also Magadhan
devotees---many, and of long standing too---who have passed
away.[1243](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1243){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1243
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You'd think that Aṅga and Magadha were
empty of devotees who have passed away! But they too had confidence in
the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled their
ethics. The Buddha hasn't declared their passing. It would be good to do
so, for many people would gain confidence, and so be reborn in a good
place.

That King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha was a just and principled king who
benefited the brahmins and householders, and people of town and
country.[1244](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1244){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1244
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} People still sing his praises: 'That just
and principled king, who made us so happy, has passed away. Life was
good under his
dominion.'[1245](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1245){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1245
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He too had confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled his ethics. People say:
'Until his dying day, King Bimbisāra sang the Buddha's
praises!'[1246](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1246){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1246
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha hasn't declared his passing. It
would be good to do so, for many people would gain confidence, and so be
reborn in a good place.

Besides, the Buddha was awakened in
Magadha;[1247](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1247){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1247
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} so why hasn't he declared the rebirth of
the Magadhan devotees? If he fails to do so, they will be dejected."

After pondering the fate of the Magadhan devotees alone in private,
Ānanda rose at the crack of dawn and went to see the Buddha. He bowed,
sat down to one side, and told the Buddha of his concerns, finishing by
saying, "Why hasn't the Buddha declared the rebirth of the Magadhan
devotees? If he fails to do so, they will be dejected." Then Ānanda,
after making this suggestion regarding the Magadhan devotees, got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before
leaving.[1248](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1248){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1248
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Soon after Ānanda had left, the Buddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, entered Ñātika for alms. He wandered for alms
in Ñātika. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he washed his
feet and entered the brick house. He paid attention, applied the mind,
and concentrated wholeheartedly on the fate of Magadhan devotees, and
sat on the seat spread out,
thinking,[1249](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1249){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1249
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "I shall know their destiny, where they are
reborn in the next life." And he saw where they had been reborn.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat. Emerging
from the brick house, he sat on the seat spread out in the shade of the
porch.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, you look so serene; your face seems to
shine owing to the clarity of your faculties. Have you been abiding in a
peaceful meditation today, sir?"

The Buddha then recounted what had happened since speaking to Ānanda,
revealing that he had seen the destiny of the Magadhan devotees. He
continued:

### 3. Janavasabha the Spirit {.subheading}

"Then, Ānanda, a vanished spirit called out: 'I am Janavasabha, Blessed
One! I am Janavasabha, Holy One!' Ānanda, do you recall having
previously heard such a name as
Janavasabha?"[1250](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1250){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1250
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir. But when I heard the word, I got goosebumps! I thought, 'This
must be no ordinary spirit to bear such an exalted name as
Janavasabha.'"[1251](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1251){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1251
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"After making himself heard while vanished, Ānanda, a very beautiful
spirit appeared in front of
me.[1252](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1252){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1252
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And for a second time he called out: 'I am
Bimbisāra, Blessed One! I am Bimbisāra, Holy One! This is the seventh
time I am reborn in the company of the Great King Vessavaṇa. When I pass
away from here, I can become a king of
men.[1253](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1253){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1253
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> Seven from here, seven from there---\
> fourteen transmigrations in
> all.[1254](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1254){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1254
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> I remember these lives\
> where I lived before.

For a long time I've known that I won't be reborn in the underworld, but
that I still hope to become a
once-returner.'[1255](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1255){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1255
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'It's incredible and amazing that you, the venerable spirit Janavasabha,
should say:

"For a long time I've been aware that I won't be reborn in the
underworld" and also "But I still hope to become a once-returner." But
from what source do you know that you've achieved such a high
distinction?'[1256](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1256){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1256
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'None other than the Blessed One's instruction! None other than the Holy
One's
instruction\![1257](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1257){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1257
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From the day I had absolute devotion to the
Buddha I have known that I won't be reborn in the underworld, but that I
still hope to become a once-returner. Just now, sir, I had been sent out
by the great king Vessavaṇa to the great king Virūḷhaka's presence on
some business, and on the way I saw the Buddha giving his attention to
the fate of the Magadhan devotees. But it comes as no surprise that I
have heard and learned the fate of the Magadhan devotees in the presence
of the great king Vessavaṇa as he was speaking to his assembly. It
occurred to me, "I shall see the Buddha and inform him of this." These
are the two reasons I've come to see the Buddha.

### 4. The Council of the Gods {.subheading}

Sir, it was more than a few days ago---on the fifteenth day sabbath on
the full moon day at the entry to the rainy season---when all the gods
of the thirty-three were sitting together in the Hall of
Justice.[1258](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1258){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1258
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A large assembly of gods was sitting all
around, and the four great kings were seated at the four
quarters.[1259](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1259){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1259
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Great King Dhataraṭṭha was seated to the east, facing west, in front
of his gods. The Great King Virūḷhaka was seated to the south, facing
north, in front of his gods. The Great King Virūpakkha was seated to the
west, facing east, in front of his gods. The Great King Vessavaṇa was
seated to the north, facing south, in front of his gods. When the gods
of the thirty-three have a gathering like this, that is how they are
seated. After that come our seats.

Sir, those gods who had been recently reborn in the company of the
thirty-three after leading the spiritual life under the Buddha outshone
the other gods in beauty and glory. The gods of the thirty-three became
uplifted and overjoyed at that, full of rapture and happiness, saying,
"The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!"

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, celebrated with these
verses:

> "The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching."

The gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and overjoyed at
that, saying: "The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!"

Then the gods of the thirty-three, having considered and deliberated on
the matter for which they were seated together in the Hall of Justice,
advised and instructed the four great kings on the subject. Each one,
having been advised, stood at his own seat without
departing.[1260](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1260){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1260
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> The Kings were instructed,\
> and heeded good advice.\
> With clear and peaceful minds,\
> they stood by their own seats.

Then in the northern quarter a magnificent light arose and radiance
appeared, surpassing the glory of the
gods.[1261](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1261){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1261
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the
gods of the thirty-three, "As indicated by the signs---light arising and
radiance appearing---The Divinity will appear. For this is the precursor
for the appearance of the Divinity, namely light arising and radiance
appearing."

> As indicated by the signs,\
> The Divinity will appear.\
> For this is the sign of the Divinity:\
> a light vast and great.

### 5. On Sanaṅkumāra {.subheading}

Then the gods of the thirty-three sat in their own seats, saying, "We
shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have
realized it shall we go to
it."[1262](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1262){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1262
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the four great kings did likewise.

Hearing that, the gods of the thirty-three agreed in unison, "We shall
find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it
shall we go to it."

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three,
he does so after manifesting in a solid
life-form.[1263](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1263){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1263
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For a Divinity's normal appearance is
imperceptible in the visual range of the gods of the
thirty-three.[1264](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1264){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1264
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to
the gods of the thirty-three, he outshines the other gods in beauty and
glory, as a golden statue outshines the human
form.[1265](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1265){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1265
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three,
not a single god in that assembly greets him by bowing down or rising up
or inviting him to a seat. They all sit silently on their couches with
their joined palms raised, thinking, "Now the divinity Sanaṅkumāra will
sit on the couch of whatever god he chooses." And the god on whose couch
the Divinity sits is overjoyed and brimming with happiness, like a king
on the day of his coronation.

Then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra manifested in a solid life-form, taking on
the appearance of the youth Pañcasikha, and appeared to the gods of the
thirty-three.[1266](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1266){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1266
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rising into the air, he sat cross-legged in
the sky, like a strong man might sit cross-legged on a well-appointed
couch or on level ground. Seeing the joy of those gods, the divinity
Sanaṅkumāra celebrated with these verses:

> "The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!"

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra
spoke.[1267](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1267){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1267
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And while he was speaking on that topic,
his voice had eight qualities: it was clear, comprehensible, charming,
audible, lucid, undistorted, deep, and
resonant.[1268](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1268){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1268
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He makes sure his voice is intelligible as
far as the assembly goes, but the sound doesn't extend outside the
assembly. When someone has a voice like this, they're said to have the
voice of the Divinity.

Then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra, having manifested thirty-three
life-forms, sat down on the couches of each of the gods of the
thirty-three and addressed them, "What do the good gods of the
thirty-three think? How the Buddha has acted for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans\![1269](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1269){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1269
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For consider those who have gone for refuge
to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and have fulfilled their
ethics. When their bodies break up, after death, some are reborn in the
company of the gods who control what is imagined by others, some with
the gods who love to imagine, some with the joyful gods, some with the
gods of Yama, some with the gods of the thirty-three, and some with the
gods of the four great
kings.[1270](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1270){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1270
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And at the very least they swell the hosts
of the centaurs."

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And hearing
the sound of the Divinity speaking on that topic, the gods fancied, "The
one sitting on my couch is the only one speaking."

> When one is speaking,\
> all the forms speak.\
> When one sits in silence,\
> they all remain silent.
>
> But those gods imagine---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> that the one on their seat\
> is the only one to speak.

Next the divinity Sanaṅkumāra merged into one corporeal form. Then he
sat on the couch of Sakka, lord of gods, and addressed the gods of the
thirty-three:[1271](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1271){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1271
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 6. Developing the Bases of Psychic Power {.subheading}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha---are the four bases of psychic power! They are taught
for the amplification, burgeoning, and transformation of psychic
power.[1272](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1272){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1272
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power
taught by the Buddha for the amplification, burgeoning, and
transformation of psychic power.

All the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or present who wield
the many kinds of psychic power do so by developing and cultivating
these four bases of psychic power. Gentlemen, do you see such psychic
might and power in me?"

"Yes, Great Divinity."

"I too became so mighty and powerful by developing and cultivating these
four bases of psychic power."

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And having
spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 7. The Three Openings {.subheading}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well understood by
the Buddha are the three opportunities for achieving
happiness\![1273](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1273){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1273
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What three?

First, take someone who lives mixed up with sensual pleasures and
unskillful
qualities.[1274](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1274){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1274
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} After some time they hear the teaching of
the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and
practice accordingly. They live aloof from sensual pleasures and
unskillful
qualities.[1275](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1275){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1275
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That gives rise to pleasure, and more than
pleasure,
happiness,[1276](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1276){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1276
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} like the joy that's born from gladness.
This is the first opportunity for achieving happiness.

Next, take someone whose coarse physical, verbal, and mental processes
have not died
down.[1277](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1277){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1277
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} After some time they hear the teaching of
the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and
practice accordingly. Their coarse physical, verbal, and mental
processes die down. That gives rise to pleasure, and more than pleasure,
happiness, like the joy that's born from gladness. This is the second
opportunity for achieving happiness.

Next, take someone who doesn't truly understand what is skillful and
what is
unskillful,[1278](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1278){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1278
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} what is blameworthy and what is blameless,
what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is
inferior and what is superior, and what is on the side of dark and the
side of bright. After some time they hear the teaching of the noble
ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and practice
accordingly. They truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful, and so on. Knowing and seeing like this, ignorance is given
up and knowledge arises. That gives rise to pleasure, and more than
pleasure, happiness, like the joy that's born from gladness. This is the
third opportunity for achieving happiness.

These are the three opportunities for achieving happiness that have been
understood by the Buddha."

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And having
spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 8. Mindfulness Meditation {.subheading}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Buddha are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are taught
for achieving what is
skillful.[1279](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1279){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1279
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body
internally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. As they meditate in this way, they become
rightly immersed in that, and rightly serene. Then they give rise to
knowledge and vision of other people's bodies
externally.[1280](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1280){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1280
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally ... Then they
give rise to knowledge and vision of other people's feelings externally.

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally ... Then they
give rise to knowledge and vision of other people's minds externally.

They meditate observing an aspect of principles internally---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
As they meditate in this way, they become rightly immersed in that, and
rightly serene. Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other
people's principles externally.

These are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation taught by the Buddha
for achieving what is skillful."

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And having
spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 9. Seven Prerequisites of Immersion {.subheading}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Buddha are the seven prerequisites of immersion for the development
and fulfillment of right
immersion\![1281](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1281){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1281
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What seven? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right
mindfulness. Unification of mind with these seven factors as
prerequisites is what is called noble right immersion 'with its vital
conditions' and also 'with its prerequisites'.

Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to
right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action
gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right
effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness
gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right
knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right
freedom.[1282](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1282){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1282
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

If anything should be rightly described as 'a teaching that's well
explained by the Buddha, apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves; and the doors to freedom from death are flung
open,' it's
this.[1283](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1283){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1283
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the teaching is well explained by the
Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves---and the doors to freedom from death are flung open.

Whoever has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha, and has the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones; and whoever
is spontaneously reborn, and is trained in the teaching; more than
2,400,000 such Magadhan devotees have passed away having ended three
fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for
awakening.[1284](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1284){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1284
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there are once-returners here, too.

> And as for the rest of
> folk,[1285](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1285){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1285
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> who I think have shared in merit---\
> I couldn't even number them,\
> for fear of speaking falsely."

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And while he
was speaking on that topic, this thought came to the great king
Vessavaṇa, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! That there should be such a
magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching!
And that such achievements of high distinction should be made known!"

And then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra, knowing the great king Vessavaṇa's
train of thought, said to him, "What does Great King Vessavaṇa think? In
the past, too, there was such a magnificent Teacher, and such a
magnificent exposition of the teaching! And such achievements of high
distinction were made
known\![1286](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1286){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1286
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the future, too, there will be such a
magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching!
And such achievements of high distinction will be made known!"

That, sir, is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke to the
gods of the thirty-three. And the great king Vessavaṇa, having heard and
learned it in the presence of the Divinity as he was speaking on that
topic, informed his own
assembly.'"[1287](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1287){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1287
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And the spirit Janavasabha, having heard and learned it in the presence
of the great king Vessavaṇa as he was speaking on that topic to his own
assembly, informed the Buddha. And the Buddha, having heard and learned
it in the presence of the spirit Janavasabha, and also from his own
direct knowledge, informed Venerable Ānanda. And Venerable Ānanda,
having heard and learned it in the presence of the Buddha, informed the
monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen.[1288](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1288){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1288
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's how this spiritual life has
become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and
well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans.[1289](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1289){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1289
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="dn19">

## [DN 19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Steward ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāgovindasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then, late at night, the centaur Pañcasikha, lighting up the entire
Vulture's Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
said to
him,[1290](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1290){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1290
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, I would tell you of what I heard and
learned directly from the gods of the thirty-three."

"Tell me, Pañcasikha," said the Buddha.

### 1. The Council of the Gods {.subheading}

"Sir, it was more than a few days ago---on the fifteenth day sabbath on
the full moon day at the invitation to admonish held at the end of the
rainy season---when all the gods of the thirty-three were sitting
together in the Hall of
Justice.[1291](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1291){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1291
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A large assembly of gods was sitting all
around, and the four great kings were seated at the four quarters.

The Great King Dhataraṭṭha was seated to the east, facing west, in front
of his gods. The Great King Virūḷhaka was seated to the south, facing
north, in front of his gods. The Great King Virūpakkha was seated to the
west, facing east, in front of his gods. The Great King Vessavaṇa was
seated to the north, facing south, in front of his gods.

When the gods of the thirty-three have a gathering like this, that is
how they are seated. After that come our seats.

Sir, those gods who had been recently reborn in the company of the
thirty-three after leading the spiritual life under the Buddha outshine
the other gods in beauty and glory. The gods of the thirty-three became
uplifted and overjoyed at that, full of rapture and happiness, saying,
'The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!'

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, celebrated with these
verses:

> 'The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!'

The gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and overjoyed at
that, full of rapture and happiness, saying, 'The heavenly hosts swell,
while the titan hosts dwindle!'

### 2. Eight Genuine Praises {.subheading}

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed them,
'Gentlemen, would you like to hear eight genuine praises of the
Buddha?'[1292](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1292){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1292
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Indeed we would, sir.'

Then Sakka proffered these eight genuine praises of the
Buddha:[1293](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1293){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1293
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'What do the good gods of the thirty-three
think?[1294](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1294){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1294
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How the Buddha has acted for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans! I don't see any
Teacher, past or present, who has such sympathy for the world, apart
from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has explained the teaching well---apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves. I don't see any
Teacher, past or present, who explains such a relevant teaching, apart
from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has well described what is skillful and what is
unskillful,[1295](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1295){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1295
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} what is blameworthy and what is blameless,
what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is
inferior and what is superior, and what is on the side of dark and the
side of bright. I don't see any Teacher, past or present, who so clearly
describes all these things, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has well described the practice that leads to
extinguishment for his disciples. And extinguishment converges with the
practice,[1296](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1296){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1296
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} as the waters of the Ganges come together
and converge with the waters of the
Yamuna.[1297](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1297){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1297
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
who so clearly describes the practice that leads to extinguishment for
his disciples, apart from the Buddha.

Also, possessions and popularity have accrued to the Buddha, so much
that you'd think it would thrill even the aristocrats. But he takes his
food free of
vanity.[1298](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1298){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1298
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
who takes their food so free of vanity, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has gained companions, both trainees who are
practicing, and those with defilements ended who have completed their
journey.[1299](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1299){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1299
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha is committed to the joy of
solitude, but doesn't send them
away.[1300](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1300){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1300
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
so committed to the joy of solitude, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha does as he says, and says as he does, thus: he does as
he says, and says as he
does.[1301](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1301){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1301
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
who so practices in line with the teaching, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision. He has
achieved all he wished for regarding the fundamental purpose of the
spiritual
life.[1302](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1302){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1302
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
who has achieved these things, apart from the Buddha.'

These are the eight genuine praises of the Buddha proffered by Sakka.
Hearing them, the gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and
overjoyed.

Then some gods thought, 'If only four fully awakened Buddhas might arise
in the world and teach the Dhamma, just like the Blessed One! That would
be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the
world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!'

Other gods thought, 'Let alone four fully awakened Buddhas; if only
three fully awakened Buddhas, or two fully awakened Buddhas might arise
in the world and teach the Dhamma, just like the Blessed One! That would
be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the
world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!'

When they said this, Sakka said, 'It is impossible, gentlemen, for two
perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system
at the same
time.[1303](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1303){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1303
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} May that Blessed One be healthy and well,
and remain with us for a long
time\![1304](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1304){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1304
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That would be for the welfare and happiness
of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans!'

Then the gods of the thirty-three, having considered and deliberated on
the matter for which they were seated together in the Hall of Justice,
advised and instructed the four great kings on the subject. Each one,
having been advised, stood at his own seat without departing.

> The Kings were instructed,\
> and heeded good advice.\
> With clear and peaceful minds,\
> they stood by their own seats.

Then in the northern quarter a magnificent light arose and radiance
appeared, surpassing the glory of the gods. Then Sakka, lord of gods,
addressed the gods of the thirty-three, 'As indicated by the
signs---light arising and radiance appearing---the Divinity will appear.
For this is the precursor for the appearance of the Divinity, namely
light arising and radiance appearing.'

> As indicated by the signs,\
> the Divinity will appear.\
> For this is the sign of the Divinity:\
> a light vast and great.

### 3. On Sanaṅkumāra {.subheading}

Then the gods of the thirty-three sat in their own seats, saying, 'We
shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have
realized it shall we go to it.' And the four great kings did likewise.
Hearing that, the gods of the thirty-three agreed in unison, 'We shall
find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it
shall we go to it.'

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three,
he does so after manifesting in a solid corporeal form. For a Divinity's
normal appearance is imperceptible in the visual range of the gods of
the thirty-three. When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of
the thirty-three, he outshines the other gods in beauty and glory, as a
golden statue outshines the human form. When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra
appears to the gods of the thirty-three, not a single god in that
assembly greets him by bowing down or rising up or inviting him to a
seat. They all sit silently on their couches with their joined palms
raised, thinking, 'Now the divinity Sanaṅkumāra will sit on the couch of
whatever god he chooses.' And the god on whose couch the Divinity sits
is overjoyed and brimming with happiness, like a king on the day of his
coronation.

Seeing the joy of those gods, the divinity Sanaṅkumāra celebrated with
these verses:

> 'The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!'

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And while he
was speaking on that topic, his voice had eight qualities: it was clear,
comprehensible, charming, audible, lucid, undistorted, deep, and
resonant. He makes sure his voice is intelligible as far as the assembly
goes, but the sound doesn't extend outside the assembly. When someone
has a voice like this, they're said to have the voice of the Divinity.

Then the gods of the thirty-three said to the divinity Sanaṅkumāra,
'Good, Great Divinity! Having appraised this, we
rejoice.[1305](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1305){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1305
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there are the eight genuine praises of
the Buddha spoken by Sakka---having appraised them, too, we rejoice.'

### 4. Eight Genuine Praises {.subheading}

Then the Divinity said to Sakka, 'It would be good, lord of gods, if I
could also hear the eight genuine praises of the Buddha.'

Saying, 'Yes, Great Divinity,' Sakka repeated the eight genuine praises
for him.

Hearing them, the divinity Sanaṅkumāra was uplifted and overjoyed, full
of rapture and happiness. Then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra manifested in a
solid corporeal form, taking on the appearance of the youth Pañcasikha,
and appeared to the gods of the thirty-three. Rising into the air, he
sat cross-legged in the sky, like a strong man might sit cross-legged on
a well-appointed couch or on level ground. There he addressed the gods
of the thirty-three:

### 5. The Story of the Steward {.subheading}

'What do the gods of the thirty-three think about the extent of the
Buddha's great wisdom?

Once upon a time, there was a king named
Disampati.[1306](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1306){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1306
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had a brahmin high priest named the
Steward.[1307](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1307){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1307
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Disampati's son was the prince named
Reṇu,[1308](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1308){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1308
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} while the Steward's son was the student
named
Jotipāla.[1309](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1309){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1309
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There were Reṇu the prince, Jotipāla the
student, and six other aristocrats; these eight became friends.

In due course the brahmin Steward passed away. At his passing, King
Disampati lamented, "At a time when I have relinquished all my duties to
the brahmin Steward and amuse myself, supplied and provided with the
five kinds of sensual stimulation, he passes
away!"[1310](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1310){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1310
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Prince Reṇu said to him, "Sire, don't lament too much
at the Steward's passing. He has a son named Jotipāla, who is even more
astute and expert than his father. He should manage the affairs that
were managed by his father."

"Is that so, my prince?"

"That is so, sire."

### 6. The Story of the Great Steward {.subheading}

So King Disampati addressed one of his men, "Please, mister, go to the
student Jotipāla, and say to him, 'Best wishes, Jotipāla! You are
summoned by King Disampati; he wants to see you.'"

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then
Jotipāla went to the king and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and the king said to him, "May you, Jotipāla, manage my
affairs---please don't turn me down! I shall appoint you to your
father's position, and anoint you as
Steward."[1311](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1311){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1311
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Jotipāla.

So the king anointed him as Steward and appointed him to his father's
position. After his appointment, the Steward Jotipāla managed both the
affairs that his father had managed, and other affairs that his father
had not
managed.[1312](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1312){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1312
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He organized both the works that his father
had organized, and other works that his father had not organized. When
people noticed this they said, "The brahmin is indeed a Steward, a Great
Steward!" And that's how the student Jotipāla came to be known as the
Great Steward.

#### 6.1. Dividing the Realm {.subheading}

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "King
Disampati is old, elderly and senior, advanced in years, and has reached
the final stage of life. Who knows how long he has to live? It's likely
that when he passes away the king-makers will anoint Prince Reṇu as
king. Come, sirs, go to Prince Reṇu and say, 'Prince Reṇu, we are your
friends, dear, beloved, and cherished. We have shared your joys and
sorrows. King Disampati is old, elderly and senior, advanced in years,
and has reached the final stage of life. Who knows how long he has to
live? It's likely that when he passes away the king-makers will anoint
you as king. If you should gain kingship, share it with us.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the six aristocrats. They went to Prince Reṇu and
put the proposal to him.

The prince replied, "Who else, sirs, in my realm ought to prosper if not
you?[1313](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1313){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1313
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I gain kingship, I will share it with
you all."

In due course King Disampati passed away. At his passing, the
king-makers anointed Prince Reṇu as king. But after being anointed, King
Reṇu amused himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation.

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "King
Disampati has passed away. But after being anointed, King Reṇu amused
himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. Who knows the intoxicating power of sensual pleasures?
Come, sirs, go to Prince Reṇu and say, 'Sir, King Disampati has passed
away, and you have been anointed as king. Do you remember what you
said?'"

"Yes, sir," replied the six aristocrats. They went to King Reṇu and
said, "Sir, King Disampati has passed away, and you have been anointed
as king. Do you remember what you said?"

"I remember, sirs. Who is able to neatly divide into seven equal parts
this great land, so broad in the north and narrow as the front of a cart
in the
south?"[1314](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1314){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1314
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Who else, sir, if not the Great Steward?"

So King Reṇu addressed one of his men, "Please, mister, go to the
brahmin Great Steward and say that King Reṇu summons him."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then the
Great Steward went to the king and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and the king said to him, "Come, let the good Steward neatly
divide into seven equal parts this great land, so broad in the north and
narrow as the front of a cart in the south."

"Yes, sir," replied the Great Steward, and did as he was asked. All were
arranged like the fronts of
carts,[1315](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1315){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1315
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and right in the middle was King Reṇu's
nation.[1316](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1316){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1316
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> Dantapura for the
> Kaliṅgas;[1317](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1317){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1317
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Potana for the
> Assakas;[1318](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1318){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1318
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Māhissatī for the
> Avantis;[1319](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1319){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1319
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Roruka for the
> Sovīras;[1320](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1320){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1320
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Mithilā for the
> Videhas;[1321](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1321){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1321
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Campā was laid out for the
> Aṅgas;[1322](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1322){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1322
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and Varanasi for the
> Kāsis:[1323](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1323){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1323
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> these were laid out by the Steward.

Then those six aristocrats were delighted with their respective gains,
having achieved all they wished for, "We have received exactly what we
wanted, what we wished for, what we desired, what we yearned for."

> Sattabhū and
> Brahmadatta,[1324](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1324){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1324
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Vessabhū and
> Bharata,[1325](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1325){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1325
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Reṇu and the two Dhataraṭṭhas:\
> these were the seven
> Bhāratas.[1326](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1326){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1326
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The first recitation section is finished.

#### 6.2. A Good Reputation {.subheading}

Then the six aristocrats approached the Great Steward and said,
"Steward, just as you are King Reṇu's friend, dear, beloved, and
cherished, you are also our friend. Would you manage our affairs? Please
don't turn us down!"

"Yes, sirs," replied the Great Steward. Then the Great Steward managed
the realms of the seven kings. And he taught seven well-to-do brahmins,
and seven hundred bathed initiates to recite the hymns.

After some time he got this good reputation, "The Great Steward sees the
Divinity in person! The Great Steward discusses, converses, and consults
with the Divinity in
person!"[1327](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1327){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1327
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Great Steward thought, "I have the reputation of seeing the Divinity
in person, and discussing with him in person. But I don't. I have heard
that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of
tutors, said: 'Whoever goes on retreat for the four months of the rainy
season and practices the absorption on compassion sees the Divinity and
discusses with
him.'[1328](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1328){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1328
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I do that?"

So the Great Steward went to King Reṇu and told him of the situation,
saying, "Sir, I wish to go on retreat for the four months of the rainy
season and practice the absorption on compassion. No one should approach
me, except for the one who brings my meal."

"Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats to put the same
proposal, and received the same reply.

He also went to the seven well-to-do brahmins and seven hundred bathed
initiates and put to them the same proposal, adding, "Sirs, recite the
hymns in detail as you have learned and memorized them, and teach each
other how to recite."

And they too said, "Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

Then the Great Steward went to his forty equal wives to put the same
proposal to them, and received the same reply.

Then the Great Steward had a new ceremonial hall built to the east of
his citadel, where he went on retreat for the four months of the rainy
season and practiced the absorption on
compassion.[1329](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1329){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1329
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And no one approached him except the one
who brought him meals.

But then, when the four months had passed, the Great Steward became
dissatisfied and anxious, "I have heard that brahmins of the past said
that whoever goes on retreat for the four months of the rainy season and
practices the absorption on compassion sees the Divinity and discusses
with him. But I neither see the Divinity nor discuss with him."

#### 6.3. A Discussion With the Divinity {.subheading}

And then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra, knowing the Great Steward's train of
thought, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their
arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in the Great
Steward's presence. At that, the Great Steward became frightened,
scared, his hair standing on end, as he had never seen such a sight
before. So he addressed the divinity Sanaṅkumāra in verse:

> "Who might you be, sir,\
> so beautiful, glorious, majestic?\
> Not knowing, I ask---\
> how am I to know who you are?"
>
> "In the realm of divinity they know me\
> as 'The Eternal Youth'.\
> All the gods know me thus,\
> and so you should know me, Steward."
>
> "A Divinity deserves a seat and water,\
> foot-salve, and sweet cakes.\
> Sir, I ask you to please accept\
> these gifts of hospitality."
>
> "I accept the gifts of hospitality\
> of which you speak.\
> I grant you the opportunity\
> to ask whatever you desire---\
> about welfare and benefit in this life,\
> or happiness in lives to come."

Then the Great Steward thought, "the divinity Sanaṅkumāra has granted me
an opportunity. Should I ask him about what is beneficial for this life
or lives to come?"

Then he thought, "I'm skilled in what is beneficial for this life, and
others even ask me about it. Why don't I ask the Divinity about the
benefit that specifically applies to lives to come?" So he addressed the
divinity Sanaṅkumāra in verse:

> "I'm in doubt, so I ask the Divinity---`<j>`{=html}who is free of
> doubt---`</j>`{=html}\
> about things one may learn from another.\
> Standing on what, training in what\
> may a mortal reach the deathless realm of
> divinity?"[1330](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1330){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1330
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> "He among men, O brahmin, `<j>`{=html}has given up
> possessiveness,[1331](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1331){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1331
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> at one, compassionate,\
> free of putrefaction, and refraining from sex.\
> Standing on that, training in that\
> a mortal may reach the deathless realm of divinity."

"Sir, I understand what 'giving up possessiveness'
means.[1332](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1332){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1332
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone gives up a large or small
fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and
beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. That's how I understand 'giving up possessiveness'.

Sir, I understand what 'at one'
means.[1333](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1333){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1333
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone frequents a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. That's
how I understand 'at one'.

Sir, I understand what 'compassionate' means. It's when someone
meditates spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. That's how I understand 'compassionate'.

But I don't understand what you say about
putrefaction.[1334](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1334){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1334
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> What among men, O the Divinity, is putrefaction?\
> I don't understand, so tell me, attentive one:\
> wrapped in what do people stink,\
> headed for hell, shut out of the realm of divinity?"
>
> "Anger, lies, fraud, and deceit,\
> miserliness, vanity, jealousy,\
> desire, stinginess, harassing
> others,[1335](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1335){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1335
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> greed, hate, vanity, and delusion---\
> those bound to such things `<j>`{=html}are not devoid of putrefaction;
> `</j>`{=html}\
> they're headed for hell, `<j>`{=html}shut out of the realm of
> divinity." `</j>`{=html}

"As I understand what you say about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell
while living at
home.[1336](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1336){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1336
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness!"

"Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

#### 6.4. Informing King Reṇu {.subheading}

So the Great Steward went to King Reṇu and said, "Sir, please now find
another high priest to manage the affairs of state for you. I wish to go
forth from the lay life to homelessness. As I understand what the
Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell while living at
home. I shall go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

> I announce to King Reṇu,\
> the lord of the land:\
> you must learn how to rule,\
> for I no longer care for my ministry."
>
> "If you're lacking any pleasures,\
> I'll supply them for you.\
> I'll protect you from any harm,\
> for I command the nation's army.\
> You are my father, I am your
> son\![1337](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1337){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1337
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> O Steward, please don't leave!"
>
> "I'm lacking no pleasures,\
> and no-one is harming me.\
> I've heard a non-human voice,\
> so I no longer care for lay life."
>
> "What was that non-human like?\
> What did he say to you,\
> hearing which you would abandon\
> our house and all our people?"
>
> "Before entering this retreat,\
> I only liked to sacrifice.\
> I kindled the sacred flame,\
> strewn about with kusa grass.
>
> But then the Divinity the Eternal Youth\
> appeared to me from the realm of divinity.\
> He answered my question,\
> hearing which I no longer care for lay life."
>
> "I have faith, O Steward,\
> in that of which you speak.\
> Having heard a non-human voice,\
> what else could you do?
>
> We will follow your example,\
> Steward, be my Teacher!\
> Like a gem of beryl---\
> flawless, immaculate, beautiful---\
> that's how pure we shall live,\
> in the Steward's dispensation.

If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

#### 6.5. Informing the Six Aristocrats {.subheading}

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "Good sirs,
please now find another high priest to manage the affairs of state for
you. I wish to go forth from the lay life to homelessness. As I
understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to
quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness!"

Then the six aristocrats withdrew to one side and thought up a plan,
"These brahmins are greedy for wealth. Why don't we try to persuade him
with wealth?"

They returned to the Great Steward and said, "In these seven kingdoms
there is abundant wealth. We'll get you as much as you want."

"Enough, sirs. I already have abundant wealth, owing to my lords. Giving
up all that, I shall go forth."

Then the six aristocrats withdrew to one side and thought up a plan,
"These brahmins are greedy for women. Why don't we try to persuade him
with women?"

They returned to the Great Steward and said, "In these seven kingdoms
there are many women. We'll get you as many as you want."

"Enough, sirs. I already have forty equal wives. Giving up all them, I
shall go forth."

"If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

> "If you all give up sensual pleasures,\
> to which ordinary people are attached,\
> exert yourselves, being strong,\
> and possessing the power of patience.
>
> This path is the straight path,\
> this path is supreme.\
> Guarded by the good, the true
> teaching[1338](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1338){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1338
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> leads to rebirth in the realm of
> divinity."[1339](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1339){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1339
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, sir, please wait for seven years. When seven years have
passed, we shall go forth with you. Your destiny shall be ours."

"Seven years is too long, sirs. I cannot wait that long. Who knows what
will happen to the living? We are heading to the next life. We must be
thoughtful and wake up! We must do what's good and lead the spiritual
life, for no-one born can escape
death.[1340](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1340){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1340
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall go forth."

"Well then, sir, please wait for six years, five years, four years,
three years, two years, one year, seven months, six months, five months,
four months, three months, two months, one month, or even a fortnight.
When a fortnight has passed, we shall go forth. Your destiny shall be
ours."

"A fortnight is too long, sirs. I cannot wait that long. Who knows what
will happen to the living? We are heading to the next life. We must be
thoughtful and wake up! We must do what's good and lead the spiritual
life, for no-one born can escape death. As I understand what the
Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell while living at
home. I shall go forth from the lay life to homelessness."

"Well then, sir, please wait for a week, so that we can instruct our
sons and brothers in kingship. When a week has passed, we shall go
forth. Your destiny shall be ours."

"A week is not too long, sirs. I will wait that long."

#### 6.6. Informing the Brahmins {.subheading}

Then the Great Steward also went to the seven well-to-do brahmins and
seven hundred bathed initiates and said, "Good sirs, please now find
another tutor to teach you to recite the hymns. I wish to go forth from
the lay life to homelessness. As I understand what the Divinity says
about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell while living at home. I shall
go forth from the lay life to homelessness."

"Please don't go forth from the lay life to homelessness! The life of
one gone forth is of little influence or profit, whereas the life of a
brahmin is of great influence and profit."

"Please, good sirs, don't say that. Who has greater influence and profit
than myself? For now I am like a king to kings, like the Divinity to
brahmins, like a deity to householders. Giving up all that, I shall go
forth. As I understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction, it's
not easy to quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the lay
life to homelessness."

"If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

#### 6.7. Informing the Wives {.subheading}

Then the Great Steward went to his forty equal wives and said, "Ladies,
please do whatever you wish, whether returning to your own families, or
finding another husband. I wish to go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. As I understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction,
it's not easy to quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the
lay life to homelessness."

"You are the only family we want! You are the only husband we want! If
you are going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we shall do so
too. Your destiny shall be
ours."[1341](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1341){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1341
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 6.8. The Great Steward Goes Forth {.subheading}

When a week had passed, the Great Steward shaved off his hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness. And when he had gone forth, the seven anointed aristocrat
kings, the seven brahmins with seven hundred initiates, the forty equal
wives, and many thousands of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and
many harem women shaved off their hair and beards, dressed in ocher
robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1342](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1342){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1342
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Escorted by that assembly, the Great Steward wandered on tour among the
villages, towns, and capital cities. And at that time, whenever he
arrived at a village or town, he was like a king to kings, like the
Divinity to brahmins, like a deity to householders. And whenever people
sneezed or tripped over they'd say: "Homage to the Great Steward! Homage
to the high priest for the seven!"

And the Great Steward meditated spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill
will.[1343](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1343){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1343
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He meditated spreading a heart full of
compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. And he taught his disciples the path to rebirth in
the company of Divinity.

Those of his disciples who completely understood the Great Steward's
instructions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, were reborn
in the realm of divinity. Of those disciples who only partly understood
the Great Steward's instructions, some were reborn in the company of the
gods who control what is imagined by others, while some were reborn in
the company of the gods who love to imagine, or the joyful gods, or the
gods of Yama, or the gods of the thirty-three, or the gods of the four
great kings. And at the very least they swelled the hosts of the
centaurs.

And so the going forth of all those gentlemen was not in vain, was not
wasted, but was fruitful and fertile.'

Do you remember this, Blessed One?"

"I remember, Pañcasikha. I myself was the brahmin Great Steward at that
time.[1344](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1344){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1344
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And I taught those disciples the path to
rebirth in the company of Divinity. But that spiritual path of mine
doesn't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads as far as rebirth in the
realm of
divinity.[1345](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1345){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1345
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But this spiritual path does lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. And what is
the spiritual path that leads to extinguishment? It is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion. This is the spiritual path that leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

Those of my disciples who completely understand my instructions realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements.

Of those disciples who only partly understand my instructions, some,
with the ending of the five lower fetters, become reborn spontaneously.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world.

Some, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed,
hate, and delusion, become once-returners. They come back to this world
once only, then make an end of suffering.

And some, with the ending of three fetters, become stream-enterers, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

And so the going forth of all those gentlemen was not in vain, was not
wasted, but was fruitful and fertile."

That is what the Buddha said. Delighted, the centaur Pañcasikha approved
and agreed with what the Buddha said. He bowed and respectfully circled
the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

</article>
<article id="dn20">

## [DN 20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Congregation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsamayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, in the Great Wood near Kapilavatthu, together with a
large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants, all of whom were perfected
ones. And most of the deities from ten solar systems had gathered to see
the Buddha and the Saṅgha of
mendicants.[1346](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1346){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1346
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then four deities of the Pure Abodes, aware of what was happening,
thought:[1347](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1347){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1347
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Why don't we go to the Buddha and each
recite a verse in his presence?"

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
they vanished from the Pure Abodes and reappeared in front of the
Buddha. They bowed to the Buddha and stood to one side. Standing to one
side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "There's a great congregation in the
> woods,[1348](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1348){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1348
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> where heavenly hosts have assembled.\
> We've come to this righteous congregation\
> to see the invincible Saṅgha!"

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "The mendicants there are immersed in samādhi,\
> they've straightened their own minds.\
> Like a charioteer holding the reins,\
> the astute ones protect their senses."

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "They snapped the post and snapped the cross-bar,\
> unstirred, they tore out the boundary
> post.[1349](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1349){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1349
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> They live pure and immaculate,\
> the young giants tamed by the Clear-eyed
> One."[1350](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1350){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1350
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "Anyone who has gone to the Buddha for refuge\
> won't go to a plane of loss.\
> After giving up this human body,\
> they swell the hosts of
> gods."[1351](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1351){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1351
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. The Gathering of Deities {.subheading}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, most of the deities from ten solar systems have gathered to
see the Realized One and the mendicant Saṅgha. The Buddhas of the past
had, and the Buddhas of the future will have, gatherings of deities that
are at most like the gathering for me
now.[1352](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1352){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1352
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall declare the names of the heavenly
hosts; I shall extol the names of the heavenly hosts; I shall teach the
names of the heavenly hosts. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied.

The Buddha said this:

> "I invoke a paean of
> praise\![1353](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1353){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1353
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Where the earth-gods dwell,\
> there, in mountain caves,\
> resolute and composed,
>
> dwell many like lonely lions,\
> who have mastered their
> fears.[1354](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1354){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1354
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Their minds are bright and pure,\
> clear and undisturbed."
>
> The teacher knew that over five hundred\
> were in the wood at Kapilavatthu.\
> Therefore he addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "The heavenly hosts have come forth;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them."\
> Those monks grew keen,\
> hearing the Buddha's instruction.
>
> Knowledge manifested in them,\
> seeing those non-human beings.\
> Some saw a hundred,\
> a thousand, even seventy thousand,
>
> while some saw a hundred thousand\
> non-human beings.\
> But some saw an endless number\
> spread out in every direction.
>
> And all that was known\
> and distinguished by the Clear-eyed One.\
> Therefore he addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "The heavenly hosts have come forth;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them.\
> I shall extol them for you,\
> with lyrics in proper order.
>
> There are seven thousand
> spirits,[1355](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1355){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1355
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> earth-gods of Kapilavatthu.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From the Himalayas there are six thousand\
> spirits of different
> colors.[1356](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1356){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1356
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From Mount Sātā there are three
> thousand[1357](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1357){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1357
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> And thus there are sixteen thousand\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From Vessāmitta's mountain there are five
> hundred[1358](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1358){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1358
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> And there's Kumbhīra of
> Rājagaha,[1359](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1359){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1359
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> whose home is on Mount Vepulla.\
> Attended by more than\
> a hundred thousand spirits,\
> Kumbhīra of Rājagaha\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> King Dhataraṭṭha
> rules[1360](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1360){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1360
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the eastern quarter.\
> Lord of the
> centaurs,[1361](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1361){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1361
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named
> Indra.[1362](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1362){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1362
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King Virūḷhaka
> rules[1363](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1363){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1363
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the southern quarter.\
> Lord of the
> goblins,[1364](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1364){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1364
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King Virūpakkha
> rules[1365](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1365){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1365
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the western quarter.\
> Lord of the dragons,\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King Kuvera
> rules[1366](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1366){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1366
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the northern quarter.\
> Lord of spirits,\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> Dhataraṭṭha in the east,\
> Virūḷhaka to the south,\
> Virūpakkha to the west,\
> and Kuvera in the north.
>
> These four great
> kings,[1367](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1367){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1367
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> all around in the four quarters,\
> stood there dazzling\
> in the wood at Kapilavatthu.
>
> Their deceitful heathens
> came,[1368](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1368){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1368
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> so treacherous and crafty---\
> the deceivers Kuṭeṇḍu,
> Viṭeṇḍu,[1369](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1369){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1369
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> with Viṭucca and
> Viṭuṭa.[1370](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1370){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1370
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> And Candana and
> Kāmaseṭṭha,[1371](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1371){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1371
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Kinnughaṇḍu and Nighaṇḍu,\
> Panāda and
> Opamañña,[1372](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1372){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1372
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and Mātali, the god's
> charioteer.[1373](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1373){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1373
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Cittasena the centaur came
> too,[1374](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1374){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1374
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the kings Nala and
> Janesabha.[1375](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1375){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1375
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Pañcasikha came too,
> with[1376](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1376){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1376
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Timbaru and Suriyavaccasā.
>
> These and other kings there were,\
> the centaurs with their kings.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> Then came the dragons of Nābhasa
> lake,[1377](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1377){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1377
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and those from Vesālī with those from
> Takkasilā.[1378](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1378){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1378
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The Kambalas and Assataras
> came[1379](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1379){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1379
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and those from Payāga with their
> kin.[1380](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1380){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1380
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Those from Yamunā, and the
> Dhataraṭṭha[1381](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1381){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1381
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> dragons came, so glorious.\
> And Erāvaṇa the great dragon\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> Those who seize the dragon kings by
> force---[1382](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1382){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1382
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Heavenly, twice-born birds with piercing
> vision---[1383](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1383){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1383
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> swoop down to the wood from the sky;\
> their name is 'Rainbow
> Phoenix'.[1384](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1384){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1384
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> But the dragon kings remained fearless,\
> for the Buddha kept them safe from the phoenixes.\
> Introducing each other with gentle words,\
> the dragons and phoenixes `<j>`{=html}took the Buddha as
> refuge.[1385](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1385){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1385
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}
>
> Defeated by
> Vajirahattha,[1386](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1386){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1386
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the titans live in the ocean.\
> They're brothers of
> Vāsava,[1387](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1387){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1387
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> powerful and glorious.
>
> There's the terrifying
> Kālakañjas,[1388](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1388){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1388
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the Dānava and Ghasa
> titans,[1389](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1389){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1389
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Vepacitti and
> Sucitti,[1390](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1390){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1390
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Pahārāda with
> Namuci,[1391](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1391){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1391
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> and Bali's hundred
> sons,[1392](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1392){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1392
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> all named after
> Virocana.[1393](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1393){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1393
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Bali's army armed themselves\
> and went to the auspicious Rāhu,
> saying:[1394](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1394){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1394
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> 'Now is the time, sir,\
> for the meeting of mendicants in the wood.'
>
> The gods of water and earth,\
> and fire and wind came
> there.[1395](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1395){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1395
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The gods of Varuṇa and Varuṇa's
> offsping,[1396](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1396){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1396
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and Soma together with
> Yasa.[1397](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1397){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1397
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> A host of the gods of
> love[1398](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1398){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1398
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and compassion came, so glorious.\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The Vishnu and Sahalī
> gods,[1399](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1399){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1399
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the unequaled pair of
> twins.[1400](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1400){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1400
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The gods living on the moon came,\
> with the Moon before them.
>
> The gods living on the sun came,\
> with the Sun before them.\
> And with the stars before them\
> came the languid gods of clouds.
>
> And Vāsava came, the greatest of the
> Vasus,[1401](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1401){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1401
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> who is Sakka the Able, Purindada the
> Firstgiver:[1402](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1402){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1402
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> Then came the Sahabhū
> gods,[1403](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1403){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1403
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> blazing like a crested flame;\
> and the Ariṭṭhakas and Rojas
> too,[1404](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1404){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1404
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the gods hued blue as flax.
>
> The Varuṇas and
> Sahadhammas,[1405](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1405){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1405
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the Accutas and
> Anejakas,[1406](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1406){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1406
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the Sūleyyas and Ruciras all
> came,[1407](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1407){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1407
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> as did the Vāsavanesi
> gods.[1408](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1408){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1408
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The Samānas,
> Mahāsamānas,[1409](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1409){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1409
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Mānusas, and Mānusuttamas all
> came,[1410](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1410){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1410
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the gods depraved by
> play,[1411](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1411){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1411
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and those who are
> malevolent.[1412](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1412){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1412
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Then came the gods of
> Mercury,[1413](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1413){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1413
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and those who live on
> Mars.[1414](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1414){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1414
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The Pāragas and Mahāpāragas
> came,[1415](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1415){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1415
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> such glorious gods.\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The gods of Venus, the newborn Sun, `<j>`{=html}and the
> Dawn[1416](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1416){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1416
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> came along with those from
> Saturn.[1417](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1417){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1417
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> And the gods of the white globe
> came[1418](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1418){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1418
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> leading the brilliant
> gods.[1419](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1419){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1419
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> The Sadāmattas and
> Hāragajas,[1420](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1420){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1420
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and assorted glorious
> ones;[1421](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1421){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1421
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Pajjuna came
> thundering,[1422](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1422){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1422
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he who rains on all quarters.
>
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The Khemiyas from the realms of Tusita and
> Yama,[1423](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1423){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1423
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the glorious Kaṭṭhakas
> came;[1424](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1424){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1424
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the Lambītakas,
> Lāmaseṭṭhas,[1425](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1425){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1425
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> those called the Shining, `<j>`{=html}and the gods of Granted
> Wishes.[1426](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1426){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1426
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> The gods who love to imagine came too,\
> and those who delight in the Creations of Others.
>
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> These sixty hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They came organized by name,\
> these and others likewise, thinking:
>
> 'They who have shed rebirth, the kindly
> ones,[1427](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1427){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1427
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the undefiled ones who have crossed the flood---\
> let us see them, with the dragon who brought them across,\
> who like the Moon has overcome darkness.'
>
> Subrahmā and Paramatta
> came,[1428](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1428){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1428
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> with sons of those powerful ones.\
> Sanaṅkumāra and
> Tissa[1429](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1429){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1429
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> Of a thousand realms of divinity,\
> the Great Divinity stands
> forth.[1430](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1430){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1430
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> He has arisen, resplendent,\
> his formidable body so glorious.
>
> Ten Gods Almighty came
> there,[1431](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1431){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1431
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> each one of them wielding power,\
> and in the middle of them came\
> Hārita with his
> following."[1432](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1432){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1432
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> When they had all come forth---\
> the gods with their Lord, and the divinities---\
> Māra's army came forth too:\
> see the stupidity of the Dark Lord!
>
> "Come, seize them and bind them," he said,\
> "let them be bound by desire!\
> Surround them on all sides,\
> don't let any escape!"
>
> And so there the great general,\
> the Dark Lord sent forth his army.\
> He struck the ground with his fist\
> to make a horrifying sound
>
> like a storm cloud shedding rain,\
> thundering and flashing.\
> But then he retreated,\
> furious, out of control.
>
> And all that was known\
> and distinguished by the Clear-eyed One.\
> Thereupon the Teacher addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "Māra's army has arrived;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them."\
> Those monks grew keen,\
> hearing the Buddha's instruction.\
> The army fled from those free of passion,\
> and not a single hair was stirred!
>
> "All triumphant in battle,\
> so fearless and glorious.\
> They rejoice with all the spirits,\
> the disciples well-known among men."

</article>
<article id="dn21">

## [DN 21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sakka's Questions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sakkapañhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1433](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1433){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1433
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Magadhans, where east of Rājagaha there is a brahmin
village named Ambasaṇḍā, north of which, on Mount Vediyaka, is Indra's
hill
cave.[1434](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1434){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1434
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Sakka, the lord of gods, grew eager to see the Buddha.
He thought, "Where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha?"

Seeing that the Buddha was at Indra's hill cave, he addressed the gods
of the thirty-three, "Good sirs, the Buddha is staying in the land of
the Magadhans at Indra's hill cave. What if we were to go and see that
Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?"

"Yes, lord," replied the gods.

Then Sakka addressed the centaur
Pañcasikha,[1435](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1435){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1435
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Dear Pañcasikha, the Buddha is staying in
the land of the Magadhans at Indra's hill cave. What if we were to go
and see that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?"

"Yes, lord," replied the centaur Pañcasikha. Taking his arched harp made
from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went as Sakka's
attendant.[1436](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1436){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1436
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Sakka went at the head of a retinue consisting of the gods of the
thirty-three and the centaur
Pañcasikha.[1437](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1437){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1437
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As easily as a strong person would extend
or contract their arm, he vanished from the heaven of the gods of the
thirty-three and landed on Mount Vediyaka north of Ambasaṇḍā.

Now at that time a dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and
Ambasaṇḍā, as happens through the glory of the gods. People in the
villages round about, terrified, shocked, and awestruck, said, "Mount
Vediyaka must be on fire today, blazing and burning! Oh why has such a
dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and Ambasaṇḍā?"

Then Sakka addressed the centaur Pañcasikha, "My dear Pañcasikha, it is
hard for one like me to get near the Realized Ones while they are on
retreat practicing absorption, enjoying
absorption.[1438](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1438){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1438
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if you were to charm the Buddha first,
then I could go to see him."

"Yes, lord," replied the centaur Pañcasikha. Taking his arched harp made
from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went to Indra's hill cave. When
he had drawn near, he stood to one side, thinking, "This is neither too
far nor too near; and he'll hear my voice."

### 1. Pañcasikha's Song {.subheading}

Standing to one side, Pañcasikha played his arched harp, and sang these
verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the perfected ones, and
sensual
love.[1439](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1439){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1439
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "O Bhaddā Suriyavaccasā, my Darling
> Sunshine,[1440](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1440){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1440
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> I pay homage to your father
> Timbaru,[1441](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1441){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1441
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> through whom was born a lady so fine,\
> to fill me with a joy I never knew.
>
> As sweet as a breeze to one who's sweating,\
> or when thirsty, a sweet and cooling drink,\
> so dear are you, Aṅgīrasi, to
> me---[1442](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1442){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1442
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> just like the teaching is to all the
> saints\![1443](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1443){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1443
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Like a cure when you're struck by fever dire,\
> or food to ease the hunger pain,\
> come on, Bhaddā, please put out my
> fire,[1444](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1444){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1444
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> quench me like water on a flame.
>
> As elephants burning in the heat of summer,\
> sink down in a lotus pond to rest,\
> so cool, full of petals and of pollen---\
> that's how I would plunge into your breast.
>
> Like elephants bursting bonds in rutting
> season,[1445](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1445){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1445
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> beating off the pricks of lance and pikes---\
> I just don't understand what is the reason\
> I'm so crazy for your shapely thighs!
>
> For you, my heart is full of passion,\
> I'm in a besotted state of mind.\
> There is no going back, I'm just not able,\
> I'm like a fish that's hooked up on the line.
>
> Come on, my Bhaddā, hold me, fair of thighs!\
> Embrace me, maid of captivating eyes!\
> Take me in your arms, my lovely lady,\
> that's all I'd ever want or could desire.
>
> Ah, then my desire was such a small thing,\
> my sweet, with your curling wavy hair;\
> now, like to arahants an offering,\
> it's grown so very much from there.
>
> Whatever the merit I have forged\
> by giving to such perfected beings---\
> may that, my altogether gorgeous,\
> ripen in togetherness with
> you.[1446](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1446){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1446
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Whatever the merit I have forged\
> in this vast territory,\
> may that, my altogether gorgeous,\
> ripen in togetherness with you.
>
> As the Sakyan, absorbed, did meditate\
> at one, alert, and mindful too,\
> the sage seeking the state free of
> death---[1447](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1447){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1447
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> so I, oh my Sunshine, seek for you!
>
> And just like the sage would delight,\
> once he had awakened to the truth,\
> so I would delight, my fine lady,\
> were I to become one with you.
>
> If Sakka were to grant me one
> wish,[1448](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1448){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1448
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> as Lord of the Thirty and Three,\
> my Bhaddā, you're all I would wish for,\
> so strong is the love in me.
>
> Like a freshly blossoming sal tree\
> is your father, my lady so wise.\
> I pay homage to he, bowing humbly,\
> whose daughter is of such a kind."

When Pañcasikha had spoken, the Buddha said to him, "Pañcasikha, the
sound of your strings blends well with the sound of your
singing,[1449](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1449){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1449
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} so that neither overpowers the other. But
when did you compose these verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the perfected ones, and sensual
love?"[1450](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1450){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1450
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This one time, sir, when you were first awakened, you were staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā
River. And at that time I was in love with the lady named Bhaddā
Suriyavaccasā, 'Darling Sunshine', the daughter of the centaur king
Timbaru. But the sister desired
another.[1451](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1451){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1451
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It was the one named Sikhaṇḍī, the son of
Mātali the charioteer, who she
loved.[1452](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1452){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1452
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since I couldn't win that sister by any
means, I took my arched harp to Timbaru's home, where I played those
verses.

When I finished, Suriyavaccasā said to me, 'Dear sir, I have not
personally seen the Buddha. But I did hear about him when I went to
dance for the gods of the thirty-three in the Hall of Justice. Since you
extol the Buddha, let us meet up today.' And that's when I met up with
that sister. But we have not met since."

### 2. The Approach of Sakka {.subheading}

Then Sakka, lord of gods, thought, "Pañcasikha is exchanging
pleasantries with the Buddha."

So he addressed Pañcasikha, "My dear Pañcasikha, please bow to the
Buddha for me, saying: 'Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and
retinue, bows with his head at your feet.'"

"Yes, lord," replied Pañcasikha. He bowed to the Buddha and said, "Sir,
Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his head
at your feet."

"So may Sakka with his ministers and retinue be happy, Pañcasikha," said
the Buddha, "for all want to be happy---whether gods, humans, titans,
dragons, centaurs, or any of the other diverse creatures there may be."

For that is how the Realized Ones salute such illustrious spirits. And
being saluted by the Buddha, Sakka entered Indra's hill cave, bowed to
the Buddha, and stood to one side. And the gods of the thirty-three did
likewise, as did Pañcasikha.

And at that time the uneven places were evened out, the cramped places
were opened up, the darkness vanished in the cave and light appeared, as
happens through the glory of the gods.

Then the Buddha said to Sakka, "It's incredible and amazing that you,
the venerable Kosiya, who has so many duties and so much to do, should
come
here."[1453](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1453){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1453
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"For a long time I've wanted to come and see the Buddha, but I wasn't
able, being prevented by my many duties and responsibilities for the
gods of the thirty-three. This one time, sir, the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in the frankincense-tree hut. Then I went to Sāvatthī to
see the Buddha. But at that time the Buddha was sitting immersed in some
kind of meditation. And a divine maiden of Great King Vessavaṇa named
Bhūjati was attending on the Buddha, standing there paying homage to him
with joined
palms.[1454](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1454){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1454
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So I said to her, 'Sister, please bow to the Buddha for me, saying:
"Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his
head at your feet."'

When I said this, she said to me, 'It's the wrong time to see the
Buddha, as he's in retreat.'

'Well then, sister, please convey my message when the Buddha emerges
from that immersion.' I hope that sister bowed to you? Do you remember
what she said?"

"She did bow, lord of gods, and I remember what she said. I also
remember that it was the sound of your chariot wheels that pulled me out
of that
immersion."[1455](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1455){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1455
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the gods who were
reborn in the host of the thirty-three before me: 'When a Realized One
arises in the world, perfected and fully awakened, the heavenly hosts
swell, while the titan hosts dwindle.' And I have seen this with my own
eyes.

#### 2.1. The Story of Gopikā {.subheading}

Right here in Kapilavatthu there was a Sakyan lady named Gopikā who had
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had
fulfilled her
ethics.[1456](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1456){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1456
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Losing her attachment to femininity, she
developed masculinity. When her body broke up, after death, she was
reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.[1457](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1457){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1457
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the company of the gods of the
thirty-three she became one of my sons. There they knew him as the god
Gopaka.

Meanwhile three others, mendicants who had led the spiritual life under
the Buddha, were reborn in the inferior centaur
realm.[1458](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1458){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1458
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they amused themselves, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation, and became my
servants and attendants.

At that, Gopaka scolded them, 'Where on earth were you at, good sirs,
when you heard the Buddha's
teaching\![1459](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1459){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1459
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For while I was still a woman I had
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had
fulfilled my ethics. I lost my attachment to femininity and developed
masculinity. When my body broke up, after death, I was reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. In the company of the gods of the thirty-three
I became one of Sakka's sons. Here they know me as the god Gopaka. But
you, having led the spiritual life under the Buddha, were reborn in the
inferior centaur realm. It is a sad sight indeed to see fellow
practitioners reborn in the inferior centaur realm.'

When scolded by Gopaka, two of those gods regained their memory right
away. They went to the host of the priests of Divinity, but one god
remained attached to sensual
pleasures.[1460](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1460){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1460
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> '"I was a laywoman disciple of the Clear-eyed One,\
> and my name was Gopikā.\
> I was devoted to the Buddha and the teaching,\
> and I faithfully served the Saṅgha.
>
> Because of the excellence of the Buddha's teaching,\
> I'm now a mighty, splendid son of Sakka,\
> reborn among the Three and Thirty.\
> And here they know me as Gopaka.
>
> Then I saw some mendicants who I'd seen before,\
> dwelling in the host of centaurs.\
> When I used to be a human,\
> they were disciples of Gotama.
>
> I served them with food and drink,\
> and clasped their feet in my own
> home.[1461](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1461){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1461
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Where on earth were these good sirs at\
> when they learned the Buddha's teachings?
>
> For each must know for themselves the teaching\
> so well-taught, realized by the Clear-eyed One.\
> I was one who followed
> you,[1462](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1462){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1462
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> having heard the fine words of the noble ones.
>
> I'm now a mighty, splendid son of Sakka,\
> reborn among the Three and
> Thirty.[1463](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1463){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1463
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> But you followed the best of men,\
> and led the supreme spiritual life,
>
> but still you're born in this lesser realm,\
> a rebirth unbefitting.\
> It's a sad sight I see, good sirs,\
> fellow practitioners in a lesser realm.
>
> Reborn in the host of centaurs,\
> only to wait upon the gods.\
> Meanwhile, I dwelt in a
> house---[1464](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1464){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1464
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> but see my distinction now!
>
> Having been a woman now I'm a male god,\
> blessed with heavenly sensual pleasures."\
> Scolded by that disciple of
> Gotama,[1465](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1465){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1465
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> comprehending Gopaka, `<j>`{=html}they were struck with urgency.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> "Let's strive, let's try hard---\
> we won't serve others any more!"\
> Two of them roused up energy,\
> recalling the Buddha's instructions.
>
> Right away they became dispassionate,\
> seeing the drawbacks in sensual pleasures.\
> The fetters and bonds of sensual pleasures---\
> the ties of the Wicked One so hard to break---
>
> they burst them like a bull elephant his ropes,\
> and passed right over the thirty-three.\
> The gods with Indra and the Progenitor\
> were all gathered in the Hall of Justice.
>
> As they sat there, they passed over them,\
> the heroes desireless, practicing purity.\
> Seeing them, Vāsava was struck with
> urgency;[1466](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1466){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1466
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the master of gods in the midst of the group said,
>
> "These were born in the lesser centaur realm,\
> but now they pass us by!"\
> Heeding the speech of one so moved,\
> Gopaka addressed Vāsava,
>
> "There is a Buddha, a lord of men, in the
> world.[1467](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1467){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1467
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Known as the Sakyan Sage, `<j>`{=html}he's mastered the
> senses.[1468](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1468){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1468
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> Those sons of his lost their
> memory;[1469](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1469){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1469
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> but when scolded by me they gained it back.
>
> Of the three, there is one who remains\
> dwelling in the host of centaurs.\
> But two, recollecting the path to awakening,\
> serene, spurn even the gods.
>
> Such is the explanation of the teaching
> here:[1470](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1470){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1470
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> not a single disciple doubts
> that.[1471](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1471){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1471
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> We venerate the Buddha, the victor, lord of men,\
> who has crossed the flood and cut off doubt.
>
> They attained distinction to the extent\
> they understood the teaching here;\
> two of them distinguished\
> in the host of the priests of
> Divinity."'[1472](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1472){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1472
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> We have come here, dear sir,\
> to realize this same teaching.\
> If the Buddha would give me a chance,\
> I would ask a question, dear sir."

Then the Buddha thought, "For a long time now this spirit has led a pure
life. Any question he asks me will be beneficial, not unbeneficial. And
he will quickly understand any answer I give to his question."

So the Buddha addressed Sakka in verse:

> "Ask me your question, Vāsava,\
> whatever you want.\
> I'll solve each and every\
> question you have."

The first recitation section is finished.

Having been granted an opportunity by the Buddha, Sakka asked the first
question.

"Dear sir, what fetters bind the gods, humans, titans, dragons,
centaurs---and any of the other diverse creatures---so that, though they
wish to be free of enmity, violence, hostility, and hate, they still
have enmity, violence, hostility, and
hate?"[1473](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1473){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1473
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Such was Sakka's question to the Buddha. And the Buddha answered him:

"Lord of gods, the fetters of jealousy and stinginess bind the gods,
humans, titans, dragons, centaurs---and any of the other diverse
creatures---[1474](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1474){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1474
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} so that, though they wish to be free of
enmity, violence, hostility, and hate, they still have enmity, violence,
hostility, and hate."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

And then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, Sakka
asked another question:

"But dear sir, what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of
jealousy and
stinginess?[1475](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1475){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1475
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When what exists is there jealousy and
stinginess? When what doesn't exist is there no jealousy and
stinginess?"

"The liked and the disliked, lord of gods, are the source of jealousy
and stinginess. When the liked and the disliked exist there is jealousy
and stinginess. When the liked and the disliked don't exist there is no
jealousy and stinginess."

"But dear sir, what is the source of what is liked and disliked?"

"Desire is the source of what is liked and
disliked."[1476](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1476){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1476
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what is the source of desire?"

"Thought is the source of
desire."[1477](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1477){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1477
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what is the source of thought?"

"Judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions are the source of
thoughts."[1478](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1478){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1478
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But how does a mendicant fittingly practice for the cessation of
judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions?"

#### 2.2. Meditation on Feelings {.subheading}

"Lord of gods, there are two kinds of happiness, I say: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. There are two
kinds of sadness, I say: that which you should cultivate, and that which
you should not cultivate. There are two kinds of equanimity, I say: that
which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of happiness? Well, should you
know of a
happiness:[1479](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1479){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1479
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'When I cultivate this kind of happiness,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not cultivate that kind of happiness. Whereas, should you know of a
happiness: 'When I cultivate this kind of happiness, unskillful
qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate
that kind of happiness. And that which is free of placing the mind and
keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing
the mind and keeping it
connected.[1480](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1480){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1480
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why I said there are two kinds of
happiness.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of sadness? Well, should you know
of a sadness: 'When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not
cultivate that kind of sadness. Whereas, should you know of a sadness:
'When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate that kind of
sadness.[1481](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1481){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1481
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that which is free of placing the mind
and keeping it connected is better than that which still involves
placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[1482](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1482){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1482
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why I said there are two kinds of
sadness.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of equanimity? Well, should you
know of an equanimity: 'When I cultivate this kind of equanimity,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not cultivate that kind of equanimity. Whereas, should you know of an
equanimity: 'When I cultivate this kind of equanimity, unskillful
qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate
that kind of equanimity. And that which is free of placing the mind and
keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing
the mind and keeping it connected. That's why I said there are two kinds
of equanimity.

That's how a mendicant fittingly practices for the cessation of
judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

#### 2.3. Restraint in the Monastic Code {.subheading}

And then Sakka asked another question:

"But dear sir, how does a mendicant practice for restraint in the
monastic code?"

"Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of bodily
behavior:[1483](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1483){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1483
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. I say that there are two kinds of verbal
behavior: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. There are two kinds of search, I say: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior? Well, should
you know of a bodily conduct: 'When I cultivate this kind of bodily
conduct, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You
should not cultivate that kind of bodily conduct. Whereas, should you
know of a bodily conduct: 'When I cultivate this kind of bodily conduct,
unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should
cultivate that kind of bodily conduct. That's why I said there are two
kinds of bodily behavior.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior? Well, should
you know of a kind of verbal behavior that it causes unskillful
qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline, you should not
cultivate it. Whereas, should you know of a kind of verbal behavior that
it causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow,
you should cultivate it. That's why I said there are two kinds of verbal
behavior.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of search? Well, should you know
of a kind of search that it causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities decline, you should not cultivate
it.[1484](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1484){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1484
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whereas, should you know of a kind of
search that it causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful
qualities grow, you should cultivate it. That's why I said there are two
kinds of search.

That's how a mendicant practices for restraint in the monastic code."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

#### 2.4. Sense Restraint {.subheading}

And then Sakka asked another question:

"But dear sir, how does a mendicant practice for restraint of the sense
faculties?"

"Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of sight known by the eye:
that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. There are two kinds of sound known by the ear ... smells
known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches known by
the body ... ideas known by the mind: that which you should cultivate,
and that which you should not cultivate."

When the Buddha said this, Sakka said to him:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief
statement:[1485](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1485){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1485
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should not cultivate the kind of sight
known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities
decline.[1486](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1486){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1486
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And you should cultivate the kind of sight
known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to decline while
skillful qualities grow. You should not cultivate the kind of sound,
smell, taste, touch, or idea known by the mind which causes unskillful
qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you should
cultivate the kind of idea known by the mind which causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

Sir, that's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement. Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond doubt and got
rid of indecision."

And then Sakka asked another question:

"Dear sir, do all ascetics and brahmins have a single doctrine, ethics,
desire, and
attachment?"[1487](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1487){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1487
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, lord of gods, they do not."

"Why not?"

"The world has many and diverse elements. Whatever element sentient
beings insist on in this world of many and diverse elements, they
obstinately stick to it, insisting
that:[1488](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1488){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1488
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is the only truth, anything else is
futile.' That's why not all ascetics and brahmins have a single
doctrine, ethics, desire, and attachment."

"Dear sir, have all ascetics and brahmins reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal?"

"No, lord of gods, they have not."

"Why not?"

"Those mendicants who are freed through the ending of craving have
reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the
ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. That's why not all ascetics
and brahmins have reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from
the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of
indecision."[1489](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1489){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1489
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then Sakka, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said,
said to him,

"Turbulence, sir, is a disease, a boil, a dart. Turbulence drags a
person to be reborn in life after
life.[1490](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1490){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1490
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why a person finds themselves in
states high and low. Elsewhere, among other ascetics and brahmins, I
wasn't even given a chance to ask these questions that the Buddha has
answered. The dart of doubt and uncertainty has lain within me for a
long time, but the Buddha has plucked it out."

"Lord of gods, do you recall having asked this question of other
ascetics and
brahmins?"[1491](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1491){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1491
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do, sir."

"If you wouldn't mind, lord of gods, tell me how they answered."

"It's no trouble when someone such as the Blessed One is sitting here."

"Well, speak then, lord of gods."

"Sir, I approached those who I imagined were ascetics and brahmins
living in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. But they were stumped by
my question, and they even questioned me in return: 'What is the
venerable's name?' So I answered them: 'Dear sir, I am Sakka, lord of
gods.' So they asked me another question: 'But lord of gods, what deed
brought you to this position?' So I taught them the Dhamma as I had
learned and memorized it. And they were pleased with just that much: 'We
have seen Sakka, lord of gods! And he answered our questions!'
Invariably, they become my disciples, I don't become theirs. But sir, I
am the Buddha's disciple, a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening."

#### 2.5. On Feeling Happy {.subheading}

"Lord of gods, do you recall ever feeling such joy and happiness
before?"

"I do, sir."

"But how?"

"Once upon a time, sir, a battle was fought between the gods and the
titans. In that battle the gods won and the titans lost. It occurred to
me as victor, 'Now the gods shall enjoy both the nectar of the gods and
the nectar of the
titans.'[1492](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1492){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1492
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But sir, that joy and happiness is in the
sphere of the rod and the sword. It doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
But the joy and happiness I feel listening to the Buddha's teaching is
not in the sphere of the rod and the sword. It does lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment."[1493](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1493){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1493
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But lord of gods, what reason do you see for speaking of such joy and
happiness?"

"I see six reasons to speak of such joy and happiness, sir.

> While staying right here,\
> remaining in the godly form,\
> I have gained an extended
> life:[1494](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1494){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1494
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> know this, dear sir.

This is the first reason.

> When I fall from the heavenly host,\
> leaving behind the non-human life,\
> I shall consciously go to a new
> womb,[1495](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1495){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1495
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> wherever my mind delights.

This is the second reason.

> Living happily under the guidance\
> of the one of unclouded wisdom,\
> I shall practice
> systematically,[1496](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1496){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1496
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> aware and mindful.

This is the third reason.

> And if awakening should arise\
> as I practice systematically,\
> I shall live as one who understands,\
> and my end shall come right
> there.[1497](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1497){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1497
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This is the fourth reason.

> When I fall from the human realm,\
> leaving behind the human life,\
> I shall become a god again,\
> supreme in the heaven
> realm.[1498](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1498){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1498
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This is the fifth reason.

> They are the finest of gods,\
> the glorious Akaniṭṭhas.\
> So long as my final life goes
> on,[1499](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1499){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1499
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> there my home will be.

This is the sixth reason.

Seeing these six reasons I speak of such joy and happiness.

> My wishes unfulfilled,\
> doubting and undecided,\
> I wandered for such a long time,\
> in search of the Realized One.
>
> I imagined that ascetics\
> living in seclusion\
> must surely be awakened,\
> so I went to sit near them.
>
> 'How is there success?\
> How is there failure?'\
> But they were stumped by such questions\
> about the path and practice.
>
> And when they found out that I\
> was Sakka, come from the gods,\
> they questioned me instead about\
> the deed that brought me to this state.
>
> I taught them the Dhamma\
> as I had learned it among men.\
> They were delighted with that, saying:\
> 'We've seen Vāsava!'
>
> Now since I've seen the Buddha,\
> who helps us overcome doubt,\
> today, free of fear,\
> I pay homage to the awakened one.
>
> Destroyer of the dart of craving,\
> the Buddha is unrivaled.\
> I bow to the great hero,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun.
>
> In the same way that Divinity ought be
> revered[1500](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1500){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1500
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> by we gods, dear
> sir,[1501](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1501){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1501
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> today we shall revere you---\
> come, let us revere you
> ourselves\![1502](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1502){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1502
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> You alone are the Awakened!\
> You are the Teacher supreme!\
> In the world with its gods,\
> you have no rival."

Then Sakka addressed the centaur Pañcasikha, "Dear Pañcasikha, you were
very helpful to me, since you first charmed the Buddha, after which I
went to see him. I shall appoint you to your father's position---you
shall be king of the centaurs. And I give you Bhaddā Suriyavaccasā, for
she loves you very
much."[1503](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1503){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1503
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Sakka, touching the ground with his hand, expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three
times:[1504](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1504){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1504
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!"

And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate
vision of the Dhamma arose in Sakka, lord of gods: "Everything that has
a beginning has an end." And also for another 80,000
deities.[1505](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1505){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1505
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Such were the questions Sakka was invited to ask, and which were
answered by the Buddha. And that's why the name of this discussion is
"Sakka's Questions".

</article>
<article id="dn22">

## [DN 22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1506](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1506){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1506
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to
convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past
sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the
system, and to realize
extinguishment.[1507](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1507){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1507
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the
world.[1508](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1508){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1508
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the
world.[1509](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1509){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1509
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the
world.[1510](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1510){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1510
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the
world.[1511](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1511){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1511
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. Observing the Body {.subheading}

#### 1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their
presence.[1512](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1512){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1512
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful,
they breathe
out.[1513](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1513){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1513
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out
heavily.'[1514](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1514){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1514
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.'
Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out
lightly.'[1515](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1515){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1515
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole
body.'[1516](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1516){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1516
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical
process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the
physical
process.'[1517](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1517){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1517
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like a deft carpenter or carpenter's apprentice. When making a deep
cut they know: 'I'm making a deep cut,' and when making a shallow cut
they know: 'I'm making a shallow
cut.'[1518](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1518){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1518
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and
externally.[1519](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1519){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1519
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing the body as liable
to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to both originate and
vanish.[1520](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1520){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1520
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the
world.[1521](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1521){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1521
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

#### 1.2. The Postures {.subheading}

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: 'I am walking.' When
standing they know: 'I am standing.' When sitting they know: 'I am
sitting.' And when lying down they know: 'I am lying
down.'[1522](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1522){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1522
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whatever posture their body is in, they
know it.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.3. Situational Awareness {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out
and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and
extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl, and robes; when
eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating;
when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[1523](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1523){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1523
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of
filth.[1524](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1524){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1524
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid,
urine.'[1525](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1525){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1525
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with
various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas,
sesame, and ordinary rice. And someone with clear eyes were to open it
and examine the contents: 'These grains are fine rice, these are wheat,
these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are
ordinary
rice.'[1526](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1526){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1526
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.5. Focusing on the Elements {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement
or posture, according to the
elements:[1527](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1527){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1527
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'In this body there is the earth element,
the water element, the fire element, and the air
element.'[1528](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1528){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1528
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's as if a deft butcher or butcher's apprentice were to kill a cow and
sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into
chops.[1529](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1529){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1529
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations {.subheading}

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and
festering.[1530](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1530){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1530
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd compare it with their own
body:[1531](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1531){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1531
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This body is also of that same nature,
that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate
observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers,
leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. They'd compare it
with their own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same
kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an
aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ...

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

Bones rid of sinews, scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a
thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here
an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the
skull. ...

White bones, the color of shells ...

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...

Bones rotted and crumbled to
powder.[1532](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1532){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1532
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd compare it with their own body:
'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go
beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally. They
meditate observing the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is
established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge
and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in
the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

### 2. Observing the Feelings {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of
feelings?[1533](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1533){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1533
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: 'I feel a
pleasant
feeling.'[1534](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1534){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1534
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: 'I feel a painful feeling.'

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: 'I feel a neutral feeling.'

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling of the
flesh.'[1535](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1535){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1535
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling not of the
flesh.'[1536](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1536){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1536
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling not of the
flesh.'[1537](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1537){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1537
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling not of the
flesh.'[1538](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1538){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1538
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
feelings as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that feelings
exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

### 3. Observing the Mind {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the mind?

It's when a mendicant understands mind with greed as 'mind with
greed,'[1539](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1539){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1539
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and mind without greed as 'mind without
greed.' They understand mind with hate as 'mind with hate,' and mind
without hate as 'mind without hate.' They understand mind with delusion
as 'mind with delusion,' and mind without delusion as 'mind without
delusion.' They know constricted mind as 'constricted
mind,'[1540](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1540){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1540
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and scattered mind as 'scattered mind.'
They know expansive mind as 'expansive
mind,'[1541](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1541){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1541
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and unexpansive mind as 'unexpansive mind.'
They know mind that is not supreme as 'mind that is not supreme,' and
mind that is supreme as 'mind that is supreme.' They know mind immersed
in samādhi as 'mind immersed in samādhi,' and mind not immersed in
samādhi as 'mind not immersed in samādhi.' They know freed mind as
'freed mind,' and unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind.'

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the mind as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the mind
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

### 4. Observing Principles {.subheading}

#### 4.1. The Hindrances {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five
hindrances.[1542](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1542){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1542
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant meditate observing
an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: 'I
have sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them,
they understand: 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand
how sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up;
and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the
future.[1543](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1543){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1543
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have ill will in them, they understand: 'I have ill will in
me.' When they don't have ill will in them, they understand: 'I don't
have ill will in me.' They understand how ill will arises; how, when
it's already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it
doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me.' When they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I don't have dullness and
drowsiness in me.' They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise;
how, when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once
they're given up, they don't arise again in the
future.[1544](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1544){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1544
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: 'I
have restlessness and remorse in me.' When they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them, they understand: 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me.' They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them, they understand: 'I have doubt in me.'
When they don't have doubt in them, they understand: 'I don't have doubt
in me.' They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.

#### 4.2. The Aggregates {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates. And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
grasping aggregates?

It's when a mendicant contemplates: Such is form, such is the origin of
form, such is the ending of
form.[1545](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1545){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1545
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is feeling, such is the origin of
feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the
origin of perception, such is the ending of
perception.[1546](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1546){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1546
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such are choices, such is the origin of
choices, such is the ending of
choices.[1547](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1547){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1547
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is consciousness, such is the origin
of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' And so they
meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

#### 4.3. The Sense Fields {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields. And how does
a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to
the six interior and exterior sense fields?

It's when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that
arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that
has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be
abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the
future.[1548](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1548){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1548
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter ...

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter ...

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter ...

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter ...

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on
both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes
to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the
abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six internal and external sense fields.

#### 4.4. The Awakening Factors {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening
factors.[1549](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1549){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1549
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant meditate observing
an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors?

It's when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in
them understands: 'I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
When they don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they
understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not
arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that
has arisen becomes fulfilled by
development.[1550](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1550){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1550
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles
...[1551](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1551){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1551
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} energy ... rapture ... tranquility ...
immersion ... equanimity in them, they understand: 'I have the awakening
factor of equanimity in me.' When they don't have the awakening factor
of equanimity in them, they understand: 'I don't have the awakening
factor of equanimity in me.' They understand how the awakening factor of
equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening
factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.

#### 4.5. The Truths {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble
truths.[1552](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1552){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1552
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant meditate observing
an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths?

It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.'

The first recitation section is finished.

##### 4.5.1. The Truth of Suffering {.subheading}

And what is the noble truth of
suffering?[1553](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1553){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1553
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; association with
the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not
getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping
aggregates are suffering.

And what is rebirth? The rebirth, inception, conception, reincarnation,
manifestation of the sets of phenomena, and acquisition of the sense
fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient
beings.[1554](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1554){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1554
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called rebirth.

And what is old age? The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair,
wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
old age.

And what is death? The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise,
mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest
of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
death.

And what is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner
sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who
has experienced
suffering.[1555](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1555){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1555
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called sorrow.

And what is lamentation? The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of
wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has
experienced suffering. This is called lamentation.

And what is pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact.[1556](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1556){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1556
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called pain.

And what is
sadness?[1557](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1557){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1557
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mental contact. This is
called sadness.

And what is distress? The stress, distress, state of stress and distress
in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.
This is called distress.

And what is meant by 'association with the disliked is suffering'? There
are sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are
unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable. And there are those who want
to harm, injure, disturb, and threaten you. The coming together with
these, the joining, inclusion, mixing with them: this is what is meant
by 'association with the disliked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'separation from the liked is suffering'? There are
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are likable,
desirable, and agreeable. And there are those who want to benefit, help,
comfort, and protect you: mother and father, brother and sister, friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin. The division from these, the
disconnection, segregation, and parting from
them:[1558](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1558){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1558
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this is what is meant by 'separation from
the liked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering'? In
sentient beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if
only we were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to
us!'[1559](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1559){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1559
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But you can't get that by wishing. This is
what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering.' In
sentient beings who are liable to grow old ... fall ill ... die ...
experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, such a wish
arises: 'Oh, if only we were not liable to experience sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress! If only sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress would not come to us!' But you can't get
that by wishing. This is what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for
is suffering.'

And what is meant by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering'? They are the grasping aggregates that consist of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is what is meant
by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering'.

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

##### 4.5.2. The Origin of Suffering {.subheading}

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

It's the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and
greed, taking pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual
pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving to end
existence.

But where does that craving arise and where does it settle? Whatever in
the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving arises and
settles.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.[1560](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1560){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1560
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving
arises and settles.

Sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas in the
world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Eye consciousness
...[1561](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1561){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1561
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ear consciousness ... nose consciousness
... tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness
in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving
arises and settles.

Eye contact
...[1562](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1562){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1562
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue
contact ... body contact ... mind contact in the world seems nice and
pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling
born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born
of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact in the world seems nice
and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Perception of sights
...[1563](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1563){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1563
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} perception of sounds ... perception of
smells ... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception
of ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Intention regarding sights
...[1564](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1564){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1564
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} intention regarding sounds ... intention
regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention regarding
touches ... intention regarding ideas in the world seems nice and
pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for smells ...
craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for ideas in the
world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Thoughts about sights
...[1565](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1565){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1565
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} thoughts about sounds ... thoughts about
smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ... thoughts
about ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Considerations regarding sights
...[1566](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1566){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1566
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} considerations regarding sounds ...
considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding tastes ...
considerations regarding touches ... considerations regarding ideas in
the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises
and settles.

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

##### 4.5.3. The Cessation of Suffering {.subheading}

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

It's the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with
nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not
clinging to it.

Whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving
is given up and ceases.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving is given up and
ceases. ...

Considerations regarding ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and
it is there that craving is given up and ceases.

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

##### 4.5.4. The Path {.subheading}

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right
immersion.[1567](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1567){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1567
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of
suffering.[1568](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1568){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1568
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right view.

And what is right thought? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness.[1569](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1569){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1569
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right thought.

And what is right speech? The refraining from lying, divisive speech,
harsh speech, and talking nonsense. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Refraining from killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual
misconduct.[1570](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1570){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1570
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right
livelihood.[1571](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1571){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1571
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is called right mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion.

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this
way for seven years can expect one of two
results:[1572](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1572){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1572
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

Let alone seven
years,[1573](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1573){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1573
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} anyone who develops these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation in this way for six years ... five years ... four
years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven months ...
six months ... five months ... four months ... three months ... two
months ... one month ... a fortnight ... Let alone a fortnight, anyone
who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for
seven days can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very
life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

'The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn23">

## [DN 23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Pāyāsi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāyāsisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Kassapa the Prince was
wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
five hundred mendicants when he arrived at a Kosalan citadel named
Setavyā.[1574](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1574){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1574
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He stayed in the grove of Indian Rosewood
to the north of
Setavyā.[1575](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1575){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1575
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the chieftain Pāyāsi was living in Setavyā. It was a
crown property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala, teeming with living
creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park endowed to
a
brahmin.[1576](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1576){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1576
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. On Pāyāsi {.subheading}

Now at that time Pāyāsi had the following harmful misconception: "There
is no afterlife. No beings are reborn spontaneously. There's no fruit or
result of good and bad
deeds."[1577](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1577){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1577
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Setavyā heard, "It seems the ascetic
Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is staying in
the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of Setavyā. He has this good
reputation: 'He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant
speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.' It's good to see such
perfected ones." Then, having departed Setavyā, they formed into
companies and headed north to the grove.

Now at that time the chieftain Pāyāsi had retired to the upper floor of
his stilt longhouse for his midday nap. He saw the brahmins and
householders heading north towards the grove, and addressed his butler,
"My butler, why are the brahmins and householders heading north towards
the grove?"

"The ascetic Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is
staying in the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of Setavyā. He has
this good reputation: 'He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a
brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.' They're going to
see that Kassapa the Prince."

"Well then, go to the brahmins and householders and say to them: 'Sirs,
the chieftain Pāyāsi asks you to wait, as he will also go to see the
ascetic Kassapa the Prince.' Before Kassapa the Prince convinces those
foolish and incompetent brahmins and householders that there is an
afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit
or result of good and bad deeds---for none of these things are true!"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

Then Pāyāsi escorted by the brahmins and householders, went up to
Kassapa the Prince, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings
and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. Before
sitting down to one side, some of the brahmins and householders of
Setavyā bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some
held up their joined palms toward Kassapa the Prince, some announced
their name and clan, while some kept silent.

### 2. Nihilism {.subheading}

Seated to one side, the chieftain Pāyāsi said to Venerable Kassapa the
Prince, "Mister Kassapa, this is my doctrine and view: 'There is no
afterlife. No beings are reborn spontaneously. There's no fruit or
result of good and bad deeds.'"

"Chieftain, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view\![1578](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1578){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1578
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For how on earth can anyone say such a
thing?

#### 2.1. The Simile of the Moon and Sun {.subheading}

Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Are the moon and sun
in this world or the other world? Are they gods or humans?"

"They are in the other world, Mister Kassapa, and they are gods, not
humans."[1579](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1579){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1579
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"By this method it ought to be proven
that[1580](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1580){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1580
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} there is an afterlife, there are beings
reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and bad
deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife, no beings are reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or
result of good and bad deeds."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who kill living
creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious,
with wrong view. Some time later they become sick, suffering, gravely
ill. When I know that they will not recover from their illness, I go to
them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view: "Those who kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are covetous, malicious, and have wrong view---when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell." You do all these things. If what those
ascetics and brahmins say is true, when your body breaks up, after
death, you'll be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that there is an
afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. I trust you and believe you. Anything
you see will be just as if I've seen it for
myself.'[1581](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1581){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1581
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They agree to this. But they don't come
back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is the method by
which I prove that there is no afterlife, no beings are reborn
spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds."[1582](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1582){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1582
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 2.2. The Simile of the Bandit {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Suppose they were to
arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to you, saying, 'Sir, this
is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' Then you'd say to
them, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly behind his back
with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from street to street
and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum. Then take him out
the south gate and there, at the place of execution to the south of the
city, chop off his head.' Saying, 'Good,' they'd do as they were told,
sitting him down at the place of execution. Could that bandit get the
executioners to wait, saying, 'Please, good executioners! I have friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin in such and such village or town. Wait
until I've visited them, then I'll come back'? Or would they just chop
off his head as he prattled
on?"[1583](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1583){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1583
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"They'd just chop off his head."

"So even a human bandit couldn't get his human executioners to stay his
execution. What then of your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin
who are reborn in a lower realm after doing bad things? Could they get
the wardens of hell to wait, saying, 'Please, good wardens of hell! Wait
until I've gone to the chieftain Pāyāsi to tell him that there is an
afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit
or result of good and bad deeds'? By this method, too, it ought to be
proven
that[1584](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1584){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1584
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} there is an afterlife, there are beings
reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and bad
deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual misconduct.
They refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical.
And they're content, kind-hearted, with right view. Some time later they
become sick, suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not
recover from their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who
refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual
misconduct; who refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are content, kind-hearted, with right view---when their
body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm." You do all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say
is true, when your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me
that there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you
see will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.3. The Simile of the Sewer {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose there were a man sunk over his head in a sewer. Then you were to
order someone to pull him out of the sewer, and they'd agree to do so.
Then you'd tell them to carefully scrape the dung off that man's body
with bamboo scrapers, and they'd agree to do so. Then you'd tell them to
carefully scrub that man's body down with pale clay three times, and
they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to smear that man's body with oil,
and carefully wash him down with fine paste three times, and they'd do
so. Then you'd tell them to dress that man's hair and beard, and they'd
do so. Then you'd tell them to provide that man with costly garlands,
makeup, and clothes, and they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to bring
that man up to the stilt longhouse and set him up with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation, and they'd do so.

What do you think, chieftain? Now that man is nicely bathed and
anointed, with hair and beard dressed, bedecked with garlands and
bracelets, dressed in white, supplied and provided with the five kinds
of sensual stimulation upstairs in the royal longhouse. Would he want to
dive back into that sewer again?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. Why is that? Because that sewer is filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and it's regarded as such."

"In the same way, chieftain, to the gods, human beings are filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and are regarded as such. The smell
of humans reaches the gods even a hundred leagues
away.[1585](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1585){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1585
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What then of your friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin who are reborn in a higher realm after doing good
things? Will they come back to tell you that there is an afterlife? By
this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on. Some time later they become sick,
suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not recover from
their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and
brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the thirty-three." You do
all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say is true, when
your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in the company of the
gods of the thirty-three. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that
there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you see
will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.4. The Simile of the gods of the thirty-three {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. A hundred human years are equivalent to one day and
night for the gods of the thirty-three. Thirty such days make a month,
and twelve months make a year. The gods of the thirty-three have a
lifespan of a thousand such
years.[1586](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1586){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1586
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, as to your friends who are reborn in
the company of the gods of the thirty-three after doing good things. If
they think, 'First I'll amuse myself for two or three days, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation. Then I'll
go back to Pāyāsi and tell him that there is an afterlife.' Would they
come back to tell you that there is an afterlife?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. For I would be long dead by
then.[1587](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1587){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1587
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But Mister Kassapa, who has told you that
the gods of the thirty-three exist, or that they have such a long life
span? I don't believe
you."[1588](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1588){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1588
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 2.5. Blind From Birth {.subheading}

"Chieftain, suppose there was a person blind from birth. They couldn't
see sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta.
They couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and
sun. They'd say, 'There's no such thing as dark and bright sights, and
no-one who sees them. There's no such thing as blue, yellow, red,
magenta, even and uneven ground, stars, moon and sun, and no-one who
sees these things. I don't know it or see it, therefore it doesn't
exist.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. There are such things as dark and bright sights,
and one who sees them. And those other things are real, too, as is the
one who sees them. So it's not right to say this: 'I don't know it or
see it, therefore it doesn't exist.'"

"In the same way, chieftain, when you tell me you don't believe me you
seem like the blind man in the simile. You can't see the other world the
way you think, with the eye of the
flesh.[1589](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1589){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1589
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are ascetics and brahmins who live in
the wilderness, frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. Meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, they purify the
heavenly eye, the power of clairvoyance. With clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see this world and the other world, and
sentient beings who are spontaneously reborn. That's how to see the
other world, not how you think, with the eye of the flesh. By this
method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I see ascetics and brahmins who are ethical, of good character,
who want to live and don't want to die, who want to be happy and recoil
from pain. I think to myself, 'If those ascetics and brahmins knew that
things were going to be better for them after death, they'd drink
poison, take their lives, hang themselves, or throw themselves off a
cliff. They mustn't know that things are going to be better for them
after death. That's why they are ethical, of good character, wanting to
live and not wanting to die, wanting to be happy and recoiling from
pain.' This is the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.6. The Simile of the Pregnant Woman {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain brahmin had two wives. One had a son ten or
twelve years of age, while the other was pregnant and about to give
birth. Then the brahmin passed away.

So the youth said to his mother's co-wife, 'Madam, all the money, grain,
silver, and gold is mine, and you get nothing. Transfer to me my
father's inheritance.'

But the brahmin lady said, 'Wait, my dear, until I give birth. If it's a
boy, one portion shall be his. If it's a girl, she will be your
reward.'[1590](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1590){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1590
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But for a second time, and a third time, the youth insisted that the
entire inheritance must be his.

So the brahmin lady took a knife, went to her bedroom, and sliced open
her belly,
thinking,[1591](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1591){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1591
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Until I give birth---whether it's a boy or
a
girl!'[1592](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1592){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1592
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} She destroyed her own life and that of the
fetus, as well as any wealth.

Being foolish and incompetent, she sought an inheritance irrationally
and fell to ruin and disaster. In the same way, chieftain, being foolish
and incompetent, you're seeking the other world irrationally and will
fall to ruin and
disaster,[1593](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1593){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1593
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} just like that brahmin lady. Good ascetics
and brahmins don't force what is unripe to ripen; rather, they wait for
it to ripen. For the life of clever ascetics and brahmins is beneficial.
So long as they remain, good ascetics and brahmins produce much merit,
and act for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for
the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.
By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, place this man in a pot while he's still
alive. Close up the mouth, bind it up with damp leather, and seal it
with a thick coat of damp clay. Then lift it up on a stove and light the
fire.'[1594](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1594){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1594
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They agree, and do what I ask. When we know
that that man has passed away, we lift down the pot and break it open,
uncover the mouth, and slowly peek inside, thinking, 'Hopefully we'll
see his soul
escaping.'[1595](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1595){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1595
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But we don't see his soul escaping. This is
how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.7. The Simile of the Dream {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. Do you recall ever having a midday nap and seeing
delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds in a
dream?"[1596](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1596){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1596
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do, sir."

"At that time were you guarded by hunchbacks, dwarves, midgets, and
younglings?"

"I was."

"But did they see your soul entering or
leaving?"[1597](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1597){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1597
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No they did not."

"So if they couldn't even see your soul entering or leaving while you
were still alive, how could you see the soul of a dead man? By this
method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife, there are
beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and
bad deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, weigh this man with scales while he's
still alive. Then strangle him with a bowstring, and when he's dead,
weigh him
again.'[1598](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1598){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1598
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They agree, and do what I ask. So long as
they are alive, they're lighter, softer, more flexible. But when they
die they become heavier, stiffer, less
flexible.[1599](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1599){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1599
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how I prove that there is no
afterlife."

#### 2.8. The Simile of the Hot Iron Ball {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose a person was to heat an iron ball all day until it was burning,
blazing, and glowing, and then they weigh it with scales. After some
time, when it had cooled and become quenched, they'd weigh it again.
When would that iron ball be lighter, softer, and more workable---when
it's burning or when it's
cool?"[1600](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1600){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1600
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"So long as the iron ball is full of heat and air---burning, blazing,
and glowing---it's lighter, softer, and more workable. But when it lacks
heat and air---cooled and quenched---it's heavier, stiffer, and less
workable."

"In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it's lighter, softer, and more flexible. But when it lacks
life and warmth and consciousness it's heavier, stiffer, and less
flexible. By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an
afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, take this man's life without injuring his
outer skin, inner skin, flesh, sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll
see his soul escaping.' They agree, and do what I ask. When he's nearly
dead, I tell them
to[1601](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1601){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1601
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} lay him on his back in hope of seeing his
soul escape. They do so. But we don't see his soul escaping. I tell them
to lay him bent over, to lay him on his side, to lay him on the other
side; to stand him upright, to stand him upside down; to strike him with
fists, stones, rods, and swords; and to give him a good shaking in hope
of seeing his soul escape. They do all these things. But we don't see
his soul escaping. For him the eye itself is present, and so are those
sights. Yet he does not experience that
sense-field.[1602](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1602){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1602
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ear itself is present, and so are those
sounds. Yet he does not experience that sense-field. The nose itself is
present, and so are those smells. Yet he does not experience that
sense-field. The tongue itself is present, and so are those tastes. Yet
he does not experience that sense-field. The body itself is present, and
so are those touches. Yet he does not experience that sense-field. This
is how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.9. The Simile of the Horn Blower {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain horn blower took his horn and traveled to a
borderland,[1603](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1603){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1603
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} where he went to a certain village.
Standing in the middle of the village, he sounded his horn three times,
then placed it on the ground and sat down to one side.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'What is making this sound,
so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and captivating?' They
gathered around the horn blower and said, 'Mister, what is making this
sound, so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and
captivating?'

'The sound is made by this, which is called a horn.'

They laid that horn on its back, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good
horn!' But still the horn made no sound.

Then they lay the horn bent over, they lay it on its side, they lay it
on its other side; they stood it upright, they stood it upside down;
they struck it with fists, stones, rods, and swords; and they gave it a
good shake, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good horn!' But still the
horn made no sound.

So the horn blower thought, 'How foolish are these borderland folk! For
how can they seek the sound of a horn so irrationally?' And as they
looked on, he picked up the horn, sounded it three times, and took it
away with him.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'So, it seems, when what is
called a horn is accompanied by a person, effort, and wind, it makes a
sound. But when these things are absent it makes no sound.'

In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it walks back and forth, stands, sits, and lies down. It
sees sights with the eye, hears sounds with the ear, smells odors with
the nose, tastes flavors with the tongue, feels touches with the body,
and knows ideas with the mind. But when it lacks life and warmth and
consciousness it does none of these things. By this method, too, it
ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open this man's outer skin. Hopefully
we might see his soul.' They cut open his outer skin, but we see no
soul. I say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open his inner skin, flesh,
sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll see his soul.' They do so, but
we see no soul. This is how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.10. The Simile of the Fire-Worshiping Matted-Hair Ascetic {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain fire-worshiping matted-hair ascetic settled
in a leaf hut in a wilderness region. Then a caravan came out from a
certain country. It stayed for one night not far from that ascetic's
hermitage, and then moved on. The ascetic thought, 'Why don't I go to
that caravan's campsite? Hopefully I'll find something useful there.'

So he went, and he saw a little baby boy abandoned there. When he saw
this he thought, 'It's not proper for me to look on while a human being
dies. Why don't I bring this boy back to my hermitage, nurse him,
provide for him, and raise him?' So that's what he did.

When the boy was ten or twelve years old, the ascetic had some business
come up in the country. So he said to the boy, 'My dear, I wish to go to
the country. Serve the sacred flame. Do not extinguish it. But if you
should extinguish it, here is the hatchet, the firewood, and the bundle
of drill-sticks. Light the fire and serve it.' And having instructed the
boy, the ascetic went to the country.

But the boy was so engrossed in his play, the fire went out. He thought,
'My father told me to serve the sacred flame. Why don't I light it again
and serve it?'

So he chopped the bundle of drill-sticks with the hatchet, thinking,
'Hopefully I'll get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

He split the bundle of drill-sticks into two, three, four, five, ten, or
a hundred parts. He chopped them into splinters, pounded them in a
mortar, and swept them away in a strong wind, thinking, 'Hopefully I'll
get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

Then the matted-hair ascetic, having concluded his business in the
country, returned to his own hermitage, and said to the boy, 'I trust,
my dear, that the fire didn't go out?' And the boy told him what had
happened. Then the ascetic thought, 'How foolish is this boy, how
incompetent! For how can he seek a fire so irrationally?'

So while the boy looked on, he took a bundle of fire-sticks, lit the
fire, and said, 'Dear boy, this is how to light a fire. Not the foolish
and incompetent way you sought it so irrationally.' In the same way,
chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you seek the other world
irrationally.[1604](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1604){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1604
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let go of this harmful misconception,
chieftain, let go of it! Don't create lasting harm and suffering for
yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. If I let go of this harmful misconception, people
will say, 'How foolish is the chieftain Pāyāsi, how incompetent, that he
should hold on to a mistake!' I shall carry on with this view out of
anger, contempt, and
spite!"[1605](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1605){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1605
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 2.11. The Simile of the Two Caravan Leaders {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a large caravan of a thousand wagons traveled from a
country in the east to the
west.[1606](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1606){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1606
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Wherever they went they quickly used up the
grass, wood, water, and the green foliage. Now, that caravan had two
leaders, each in charge of five hundred wagons. They thought, 'This is a
large caravan of a thousand wagons. Wherever we go we quickly use up the
grass, wood, water, and the green
foliage.[1607](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1607){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1607
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't we split the caravan in two
halves?' So that's what they did.

One caravan leader, having prepared much grass, wood, and water, started
the caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he
said,[1608](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1608){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1608
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. So let's toss out the grass, wood, and
water and restart the caravan with lightly-laden wagons.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and that's what they did.

But in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And all fell to ruin and disaster.
And the men and beasts in that caravan were all devoured by that
non-human
spirit.[1609](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1609){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1609
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only their bones remained.

Now, when the second caravan leader knew that the first caravan was well
underway, he prepared much grass, wood, and water and started the
caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he said, 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. But this person is neither our friend
nor relative. How can we proceed out of trust in
him?[1610](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1610){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1610
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We shouldn't toss out any grass, wood, or
water, but continue with our goods laden as before. We shall not toss
out any old stock.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and they restarted the caravan with the
goods laden as before.

And in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And they saw the other caravan that
had come to ruin. And they saw the bones of the men and beasts who had
been devoured by that non-human spirit.

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This caravan came to ruin,
as happens when guided by a foolish caravan leader. Well then, sirs,
toss out any of our merchandise that's of little value, and take what's
valuable from this caravan.'

'Yes, sir' replied the drivers, and that's what they did. They crossed
over the desert safely, as happens when guided by an astute caravan
leader.

In the same way, chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you will come
to ruin seeking the other world irrationally, like the first caravan
leader. And those who think you're worth listening to and trusting will
also come to ruin, like the drivers. Let go of this harmful
misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create lasting harm and
suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.12. The Simile of the Dung-Carrier {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain swineherd went from his own village to
another village. There he saw a large pile of dry dung abandoned. He
thought, 'This pile of dry dung can serve as food for my pigs. Why don't
I carry it off?' So he spread out his upper robe, shoveled the dry dung
onto it, tied it up into a bundle, lifted it on to his head, and went on
his way. While on his way a large sudden storm poured down. Smeared with
leaking, oozing dung down to his fingernails, he kept on carrying the
load of dung.

When people saw him they said, 'Have you gone mad, sir? Have you lost
your mind? For how can you, smeared with leaking, oozing dung down to
your fingernails, keep on carrying that load of dung?'

'You're the mad ones, sirs! You're the ones who've lost your minds! For
this will serve as food for my pigs.'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the dung carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.13. The Simile of the Gamblers {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, two gamblers were playing with seed dice. One gambler,
every time they made a bad throw, swallowed the losing
seed.[1611](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1611){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1611
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The second gambler saw him, and said, 'Well, my friend, you've won it
all! Give me the seed dice, I will roll
them.'[1612](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1612){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1612
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, my friend,' the gambler replied, and gave them.

Then the gambler soaked the seed dice in poison and said to the other,
'Come, my friend, let's play seed dice.'

'Yes, my friend,' the other gambler replied.

And for a second time the gamblers played with seed dice. And for the
second time, every time they made a bad throw, that gambler swallowed
the losing seed.

The second gambler saw him, and said,

> 'The man swallows the dice without realizing\
> they're smeared with burning poison.\
> Swallow, you damn cheat, swallow!\
> Soon you'll know the bitter fruit!'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the gambler in the simile. Let
go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create
lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.14. The Simile of the Man Who Carried Hemp {.subheading}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, the inhabitants of a certain country emigrated. Then
one friend said to another, 'Come, my friend, let's go to that country.
Hopefully we'll get some riches there!'

'Yes, my friend,' the other replied.

They went to that country, and to a certain deserted village. There they
saw a pile of abandoned sunn hemp. Seeing it, one friend said to the
other,[1613](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1613){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1613
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is a pile of abandoned sunn hemp.
Well then, my friend, you make up a bundle of hemp, and I'll make one
too. Let's both take a bundle of hemp and go on.'

'Yes, my friend,' he said. Carrying their bundles of hemp they went to
another deserted village.

There they saw much sunn hemp thread abandoned. Seeing it, one friend
said to the other, 'This pile of abandoned sunn hemp thread is just what
we wanted the hemp for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles
of hemp, and both take a bundle of hemp thread and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you
understand.'[1614](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1614){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1614
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So one friend abandoned their bundle of
hemp and picked up a bundle of hemp thread.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw much sunn hemp
cloth abandoned. Seeing it, one friend said to the other, 'This pile of
abandoned sunn hemp cloth is just what we wanted the hemp and hemp
thread for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles, and both
take a bundle of hemp cloth and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of hemp thread and picked up a bundle of hemp cloth.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw a pile of flax,
and by turn, linen thread, linen cloth, silk, silk thread, silk cloth,
iron, copper, tin, lead, silver, and gold abandoned. Seeing it, one
friend said to the other, 'This pile of gold is just what we wanted all
those other things for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles,
and both take a bundle of gold and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of silver and picked up a bundle of gold.

Then they returned to their own village. When one friend returned with a
bundle of sunn hemp, they didn't please their parents, their partners
and children, or their friends and colleagues. And they got no pleasure
and happiness on that account. But when the other friend returned with a
bundle of gold, they pleased their parents, their partners and children,
and their friends and colleagues. And they got much pleasure and
happiness on that account.

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the hemp-carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

### 3. Going for Refuge {.subheading}

"I was delighted and satisfied with your very first simile, Mister
Kassapa\![1615](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1615){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1615
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, I wanted to hear your various
solutions to the problem, so I thought I'd oppose you in this way.
Excellent, Mister Kassapa! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Kassapa has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Kassapa remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life.

Mister Kassapa, I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please instruct me
so it will be for my lasting welfare and
happiness."[1616](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1616){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1616
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 4. On Sacrifice {.subheading}

"Chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep,
chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. And
the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or beneficial or
splendid or bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
barren field, that barren ground, with uncleared stumps he sowed seeds
that were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged, infertile, and ill kept. And
the heavens don't provide enough rain when needed. Would those seeds
grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get abundant fruit?"

"No, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
slaughtered. And the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or
beneficial or splendid or bountiful.

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens
and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. And the
recipients have right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.
That kind of sacrifice is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
fertile field, that fertile ground, with well-cleared stumps he sowed
seeds that were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and
well kept. And the heavens provide plenty of rain when needed. Would
those seeds grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get
abundant fruit?"

"Yes, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
not slaughtered. And the recipients have right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. That kind of sacrifice is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful."

### 5. On the Student Uttara {.subheading}

Then the chieftain Pāyāsi set up an offering for ascetics and brahmins,
for paupers, vagrants, supplicants, and beggars. At that offering such
food as rough gruel with pickles was given, and rough clothes with
knotted
fringes.[1617](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1617){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1617
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, it was a student named Uttara who
organized that offering.

When the offering was over he referred to it like this, "Through this
offering may I be together with the chieftain Pāyāsi in this world, but
not in the next."

Pāyāsi heard of this, so he summoned Uttara and said, "Is it really
true, dear Uttara, that you referred to the offering in this way?"

"Yes, sir."

"But why? Don't we who seek merit expect some result from the offering?"

"At your offering such food as rough gruel with pickles was given, which
you wouldn't even want to touch with your foot, much less eat. And also
rough clothes with knotted fringes, which you also wouldn't want to
touch with your foot, much less wear. Sir, you're dear and beloved to
me. But how can I reconcile one so dear with something so disagreeable?"

"Well then, dear Uttara, set up an offering with the same kind of food
that I eat, and the same kind of clothes that I wear."

"Yes, sir," replied Uttara, and did so.

So the chieftain Pāyāsi gave gifts carelessly, thoughtlessly, not with
his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he
was reborn in company with the gods of the four great kings, in an empty
palace of sirisa
wood.[1618](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1618){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1618
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the student Uttara who organized the
offering gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his own hands, not
giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in
company with the gods of the thirty-three.

### 6. The God Pāyāsi {.subheading}

Now at that time Venerable Gavampati would often go to that empty sirisa
palace for the day's
meditation.[1619](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1619){#dn-mahavagga.xhtml_noteref-1619
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the god Pāyāsi went up to him, bowed,
and stood to one side. Gavampati said to him, "Who are you, reverend?"

"Sir, I am the chieftain Pāyāsi."

"Didn't you have the view that there is no afterlife, no beings are
reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds?"

"It's true, sir, I did have such a view. But Master Kassapa the Prince
dissuaded me from that harmful misconception."

"But the student named Uttara who organized that offering for
you---where has he been reborn?"

"Sir, Uttara gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his own hands, not
giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in
company with the gods of the thirty-three. But I gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with my own hands, giving the dregs. When my body
broke up, after death, I was reborn in company with the gods of the four
great kings, in an empty sirisa palace.

So, sir, when you've returned to the human realm, please announce this:
'Give gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with your own hands, not giving the
dregs. The chieftain Pāyāsi gave gifts carelessly, thoughtlessly, not
with his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after
death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the four great kings,
in an empty palace of sirisa. But the student Uttara who organized the
offering gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his own hands, not
giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in
company with the gods of the Thirty-Three.'"

So when Venerable Gavampati returned to the human realm he made that
announcement.

</article>

[]{#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml}

# The Chapter with Pāṭikaputta {#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_dn-pathikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="dn24">

## [DN 24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Pāṭikaputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāthikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. The Story of Sunakkhatta {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Mallas, near the Mallian town named
Anupiya.[1620](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1620){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1620
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha robed up in the morning
and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Anupiya for alms. Then it
occurred to him, "It's too early to wander for alms in Anupiya. Why
don't I go to visit the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan in his
monastery?"[1621](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1621){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1621
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So that's what he did. Then the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan said to
the Buddha, "Let the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One,
sir! It's been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here.
Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready."

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while the wanderer of the
Bhaggava clan took a low seat, sat to one side, and said to the Buddha,
"Sir, a few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me and
said:[1622](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1622){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1622
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Now, Bhaggava, I have rejected the Buddha.
Now I no longer live dedicated to him.' Sir, is what Sunakkhatta said
true?"

"Indeed it is, Bhaggava.

A few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said: 'Now I reject the Buddha! Now I shall no longer live
dedicated to you.'

When Sunakkhatta said this, I said to him, 'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever
say to you: "Come, live dedicated to
me"?'[1623](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1623){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1623
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the
Buddha"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask you to live dedicated to me, nor did you
say you would live dedicated to me. In that case, you futile man, who
are you and what are you rejecting? See how far you have strayed!'

'But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of
psychic power for
me.'[1624](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1624){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1624
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you: "Come, live dedicated to me and
I will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power for you"?'

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha,
and the Buddha will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power
for me"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it
of me. In that case, you futile man, who are you and what are you
rejecting? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether or not there is a
demonstration of psychic power, does my teaching lead someone who
practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?'

'It does, sir.'

'So it seems that whether or not there is a demonstration of psychic
power, my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the
complete ending of suffering. In that case, what is the point of
superhuman demonstrations of psychic power? See how far you have
strayed, you silly man!'

'But sir, the Buddha never describes the origin of the world to me.'

'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you: "Come, live dedicated to me and
I will describe the origin of the world to you"?'

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha,
and the Buddha will describe the origin of the world to me"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it
of me. In that case, you futile man, who are you and what are you
rejecting? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether or not the origin of
the world is described, does my teaching lead someone who practices it
to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?'

'It does, sir.'

'So it seems that whether or not the origin of the world is described,
my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the complete
ending of suffering. In that case, what is the point of describing the
origin of the world? See how far you have strayed, you silly man!

In many ways, Sunakkhatta, you have praised me like this in the Vajjian
capital: "That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed."

In many ways you have praised the teaching like this in the Vajjian
capital: "The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

In many ways you have praised the Saṅgha like this in the Vajjian
capital: "The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

I declare this to you, Sunakkhatta, I announce this to you! There will
be those who say that Sunakkhatta was unable to lead the spiritual life
under the ascetic Gotama. That's why he resigned the training and
returned to a lesser life. That's what they'll say.'

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 2. On the Aristocrat of Kuru {.subheading}

Bhaggava, this one time I was staying in the land of the Kurus where
they have a town named
Uttarakā.[1625](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1625){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1625
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then I robed up in the morning and, taking
my bowl and robe, entered Uttarakā for alms with Sunakkhatta the
Licchavi as my second monk. Now at that time a naked ascetic who was an
aristocrat of Kuru had taken a vow to behave like a dog. When food is
tossed on the ground, he gets down on all fours, eating and devouring it
just with his
mouth.[1626](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1626){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1626
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Sunakkhatta saw him doing this and thought, 'That ascetic is a holy
man!'[1627](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1627){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1627
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, knowing Sunakkhatta's train of thought, I said to him, 'Don't you
claim to be an ascetic, a follower of the Sakyan, you silly man?'

'But why does the Buddha say this to me?'

'When you saw that naked ascetic of Kuru, didn't you think, "That
ascetic is a holy man!"?'

'Yes, sir. But sir, are you jealous of the perfected ones?'

'I'm not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man. Rather, you
should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you. Don't
create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

That naked ascetic the aristocrat of Kuru, who you imagine to be a holy
man, will die of flatulence in seven
days.[1628](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1628){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1628
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when he dies, he'll be reborn in the
very lowest rank of titans, named the
Kālakañjas.[1629](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1629){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1629
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they'll throw him in the charnel ground
on a clump of vetiver. If you wish, Sunakkhatta, go to the aristocrat of
Kuru and ask him whether he knows his own destiny. It's possible that he
will answer: "Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own destiny. I've been
reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas."'

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see the aristocrat of Kuru and said to
him, 'Reverend aristocrat of Kuru, the ascetic Gotama has declared that
you will die of flatulence in seven days. And when you die, you'll be
reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas. And when
you die, they'll throw you in the charnel ground on a clump of vetiver.
But by eating just a little food and drinking just a little water,
you'll prove what the ascetic Gotama says to be false.'

Then Sunakkhatta counted up the days until the seventh day, as happens
when you have no faith in the Realized One. But on the seventh day, the
naked ascetic who was an aristocrat of Kuru died of flatulence. And when
he passed away, he was reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named
the Kālakañjas. And when he passed away, they threw him in the charnel
ground on a clump of vetiver.

Sunakkhatta the Licchavi heard about this. So he went to see the
aristocrat of Kuru in the charnel ground on the clump of vetiver. There
he struck him with his fist three times, 'Reverend aristocrat of Kuru,
do you know your destiny?'

Then the aristocrat of Kuru got up, rubbing his back with his hands, and
said,[1630](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1630){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1630
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own
destiny. I've been reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the
Kālakañjas.' After speaking, he fell flat right there.

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the prediction I made about
the aristocrat of Kuru turn out to be correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I performed such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'
Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 3. On the Naked Ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka {.subheading}

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood,
in the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time the naked ascetic
Kaḷāramaṭṭaka was residing in Vesālī. And in the Vajjian capital he had
reached the peak of material things and
fame.[1631](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1631){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1631
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had undertaken these seven
vows.[1632](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1632){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1632
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'As long as I live, I will be a naked
ascetic, not wearing clothes. As long as I live, I will be celibate, not
having sex. As long as I live, I will consume only meat and beer, not
eating rice and
porridge.[1633](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1633){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1633
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And I will not go past the following
tree-shrines near Vesālī: the Udena shrine to the east, the Gotamaka to
the south, the Seven Maidens to the west, and the Many Sons to the
north.'[1634](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1634){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1634
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And it was due to undertaking these seven
vows that he had reached the peak of material things and fame.

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and asked him a
question. But when it stumped him, he displayed annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. So Sunakkhatta thought, 'I've offended the holy man, the
perfected one, the
ascetic.[1635](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1635){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1635
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I mustn't create lasting harm and suffering
for myself!'

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'Don't you claim to be an ascetic, a follower of the Sakyan, you
silly man?'

'But why does the Buddha say this to me?'

'Didn't you go to see the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and ask him a
question? But when it stumped him, he displayed annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. Then you thought, "I've offended the holy man, the perfected
one, the ascetic. I mustn't create lasting harm and suffering for
myself!"'

'Yes, sir. But sir, are you jealous of perfected ones?'

'I'm not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man. Rather, you
should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you. Don't
create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

That naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, who you imagine to be a true holy man,
will shortly be clothed, living with a partner, eating rice and
porridge, having gone past all the shrines near Vesālī. And he will die
after losing all his fame.'

And that's exactly what happened.

Sunakkhatta heard about this. He came to me, bowed, and sat down to one
side. I said to him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the
declaration I made about Kaḷāramaṭṭaka turn out to be correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'
Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 4. On the Naked Ascetic Pāṭikaputta {.subheading}

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying right there near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time the naked
ascetic Pāṭikaputta was residing in Vesālī. And in the Vajjian capital
he had reached the peak of material things and
fame.[1636](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1636){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1636
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He was telling a crowd in Vesālī: 'Both the
ascetic Gotama and I speak from
knowledge.[1637](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1637){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1637
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} One who speaks from knowledge ought to
display a superhuman demonstration of psychic power to another who
speaks from knowledge. If the ascetic Gotama meets me half-way, there we
should both perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power. If he
performs one demonstration of psychic power, I'll perform two. If he
performs two, I'll perform four. If he performs four, I'll perform
eight. However many demonstrations of psychic power the ascetic Gotama
performs, I'll perform double.'

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, sat down to one side, and told me of
all this.

I said to him, 'Sunakkhatta, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is not
capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives up that statement
and that intention, and lets go of that view. If he thinks he can meet
me face to face without giving up those things, his head may explode.'

'Careful what you say, Blessed One! Careful what you say, Holy One!'

'But why do you say this to me, Sunakkhatta?'

'Sir, the Buddha has categorically asserted that Pāṭikaputta is not
capable of meeting the Buddha face to face, otherwise his head may
explode. But Pāṭikaputta might meet the Buddha face to face in disguise,
proving the Buddha wrong.'

'Sunakkhatta, would the Realized One make an ambiguous
statement?'[1638](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1638){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1638
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But sir, did you make that statement after comprehending Pāṭikaputta's
mind with your mind? Or did deities tell you about it?'

'Both, Sunakkhatta. For Ajita the Licchavi general has recently passed
away and been reborn in the host of the thirty-three. He came and told
me this, "The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is shameless, sir, he is a liar.
For he has declared of me in the Vajjian capital: 'Ajita the Licchavi
general has been reborn in the Great Hell.'

But that is not true---I have been reborn in the host of the
thirty-three. The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is shameless, sir, he is a
liar. Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting the Buddha face to face,
otherwise his head may explode."

Thus I both made that statement after comprehending Pāṭikaputta's mind
with my mind, and deities told me about it.

So Sunakkhatta, I'll wander for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on my
return from almsround, I'll go to Pāṭikaputta's monastery for the day's
meditation. Now you may tell him, if you so wish.'

### 5. On Demonstrations of Psychic Power {.subheading}

Then, Bhaggava, I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I
went to Pāṭikaputta's monastery for the day's meditation. Then
Sunakkhatta rushed into Vesālī to see the very well-known Licchavis and
said to them, 'Sirs, after his almsround, the Buddha has gone to
Pāṭikaputta's monastery for the day's meditation. Come forth, sirs, come
forth! There will be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the
holy ascetics!' So the very well-known Licchavis thought, 'It seems
there will be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy
ascetics! Let's go!'

Then he went to see the very well-known well-to-do brahmins, rich
householders, and ascetics and brahmins who follow various other
religions, and said the same thing. They all said, 'It seems there will
be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!
Let's go!'

Then all those very well-known people went to Pāṭikaputta's monastery.
That assembly was large, Bhaggava; there were many hundreds, many
thousands of them.

Pāṭikaputta heard, 'It seems that very well-known Licchavis, well-to-do
brahmins, rich householders, and ascetics and brahmins who follow
various other religions have come forth. And the ascetic Gotama is
sitting in my monastery for the day's meditation.' When he heard that,
he became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end. In fear he went
to the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery of the wanderers.

The assembly heard of this, and instructed a man, 'Come, my man, go to
see Pāṭikaputta at the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery and say to him,
"Come forth, Reverend Pāṭikaputta! All these very well-known people have
come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the
day's meditation. For you stated this in the assembly at Vesālī: 'Both
the ascetic Gotama and I speak from knowledge. One who speaks from
knowledge ought to display a superhuman demonstration of psychic power
to another who speaks from knowledge. If the ascetic Gotama meets me
half-way, there we should both perform a superhuman demonstration of
psychic power. If he performs one demonstration of psychic power, I'll
perform two. If he performs two, I'll perform four. If he performs four,
I'll perform eight. However many demonstrations of psychic power the
ascetic Gotama performs, I'll perform double.' Come forth, Reverend
Pāṭikaputta, half-way. The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and
is sitting in your monastery."'

'Yes, sir,' replied that man, and delivered the message.

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!' But
wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then that man
said to Pāṭikaputta, 'What's up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom
stuck to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm
coming, sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as you might, you can't get up
from your seat.' And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming,
sir, I'm coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his
seat.

When that man knew that Pāṭikaputta had lost, he returned to the
assembly and said, 'Pāṭikaputta has lost, sirs. He says "I'm coming,
sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as he might, he can't get up from his
seat.' When he said this, I said to the assembly, 'The naked ascetic
Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives
up that statement and that intention, and lets go of that view. If he
thinks he can meet me face to face without giving up those things, his
head may explode.'

The first recitation section is finished.

Then, Bhaggava, a certain Licchavi minister stood up and said to the
assembly, 'Well then, sirs, wait an hour, I'll go. Hopefully I'll be
able to lead Pāṭikaputta back to the assembly.'

So that minister went to see Pāṭikaputta and said, 'Come forth, Reverend
Pāṭikaputta! It's best for you to come forth. All these very well-known
people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your
monastery for the day's meditation. You said you'd meet the ascetic
Gotama half-way. The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is
sitting in your monastery. The ascetic Gotama has told the assembly that
you're not capable of meeting him face to face. Come forth, Pāṭikaputta!
When you come forth we'll make you win and the ascetic Gotama lose.'

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!' But
wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then the minister
said to Pāṭikaputta, 'What's up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom
stuck to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm
coming, sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as you might, you can't get up
from your seat.' And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming,
sir, I'm coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his
seat.

When the Licchavi minister knew that Pāṭikaputta had lost, he returned
to the assembly and said, 'Pāṭikaputta has lost, sirs.' When he said
this, I said to the assembly, 'Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me
face to face, otherwise his head may explode. Even if the good Licchavis
were to think, "Let's bind Pāṭikaputta with straps and drag him with a
pair of oxen!" But either the straps will break or Pāṭikaputta will.'

Then, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the pupil of the wood-bowl ascetic, stood up and
said to the assembly, 'Well then, sirs, wait an hour, I'll go. Hopefully
I'll be able to lead Pāṭikaputta back to the assembly.'

So Jāliya went to see Pāṭikaputta and said, 'Come forth, Reverend
Pāṭikaputta! It's best for you to come forth. All these very well-known
people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your
monastery for the day's meditation. You said you'd meet the ascetic
Gotama half-way. The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is
sitting in your monastery. The ascetic Gotama has told the assembly that
you're not capable of meeting him face to face. And he said that even if
the Licchavis try to bind you with straps and drag you with a pair of
oxen, either the straps will break or you will. Come forth, Pāṭikaputta!
When you come forth we'll make you win and the ascetic Gotama lose.'

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!' But
wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then Jāliya said
to Pāṭikaputta, 'What's up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom stuck
to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm coming,
sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as you might, you can't get up from your
seat.' And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat.

When Jāliya knew that Pāṭikaputta had lost, he said to him,

'Once upon a time, Reverend Pāṭikaputta, it occurred to a lion, king of
beasts, "Why don't I make my lair near a certain forest? Towards evening
I can emerge from my den, yawn, look all around the four quarters, roar
my lion's roar three times, and set out on the hunt. Having slain the
very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most tender flesh, I could
return to my den."

And so that's what he did.

Now, there was an old jackal who had grown fat on the lion's leavings,
becoming arrogant and strong. He thought, "What does the lion, king of
beasts, have that I don't? Why don't I also make my lair near a certain
forest? Towards evening I can emerge from my den, yawn, look all around
the four quarters, roar my lion's roar three times, and set out on the
hunt. Having slain the very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most
tender flesh, I could return to my den."

And so that's what he did. But when he tried to roar a lion's roar, he
only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal. And what is a pathetic
jackal's squeal next to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha\![1639](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1639){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1639
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Who are the pathetic Pāṭikaputtas to attack
the Realized Ones, the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas?'

When Jāliya couldn't get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with
this simile, he said to him:

> 'Seeing himself as equal to the lion,\
> the jackal presumed "I'm the king of the beasts!"\
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, you presume to attack him!'

When Jāliya couldn't get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with
this simile, he said to him:

> 'Following in the steps of another,\
> seeing himself grown fat on scraps,\
> until he doesn't even see himself,\
> the jackal presumes he's a tiger.
>
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, you presume to attack him!'

When Jāliya couldn't get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with
this simile, he said to him:

> 'Gorged on frogs, and mice from the barn,\
> and carcasses tossed in the cemetery,\
> thriving in the great, empty wood,\
> the jackal presumed "I'm the king of the beasts!"\
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! Who are the
pathetic Pāṭikaputtas to attack the Realized Ones, the perfected ones,
the fully awakened Buddhas?'

When Jāliya couldn't get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with
this simile, he returned to the assembly and said, 'Pāṭikaputta has
lost, sirs. He says "I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as he
might, he can't get up from his seat.'

When he said this, I said to the assembly, 'The naked ascetic
Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives
up that statement and that intention, and lets go of that view. If he
thinks he can meet me face to face without giving up those things, his
head may explode. The good Licchavis might even think, "Let's bind
Pāṭikaputta with straps and drag him with a pair of oxen!" But either
the straps will break or Pāṭikaputta will. Pāṭikaputta is not capable of
meeting me face to face, otherwise his head may explode.'

Then, Bhaggava, I educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired that
assembly with a Dhamma talk. I released that assembly from the great
bondage, and lifted 84,000 beings from the great swamp. Next I entered
upon the fire element, rose into the air to the height of seven palm
trees, and created a flame another seven palm trees high, blazing and
smoking. Finally I landed at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof.[1640](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1640){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1640
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the declaration I made about
Pāṭikaputta turn out to be correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 6. On Describing the Origin of the World {.subheading}

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. I understand this, and
what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding,
I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the
Realized One does not come to
ruin.[1641](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1641){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1641
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as created by the God Almighty, by the
Divinity. I go up to them and say, 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do
you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about
as created by the God Almighty, by the Divinity?' But they are stumped
by my question, and they even question me in return. So I answer them,

'There comes a time when, reverends, after a very long period has
passed, this cosmos contracts. As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings
are mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance. There they are
mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos expands. As it expands an empty mansion of divinity appears. Then
a certain sentient being---due to the running out of their life-span or
merit---passes away from that host of radiant deities and is reborn in
that empty mansion of divinity. There they are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long time.

But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become
dissatisfied and anxious, "Oh, if only other beings would come to this
place."

Then other sentient beings---due to the running out of their life-span
or merit---pass away from that host of radiant deities and are reborn in
that mansion of divinity in company with that
being.[1642](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1642){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1642
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they too are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long time.

Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks, "I am the Divinity,
the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal
Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the
First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been
born and those yet to be born. And these beings were created by me. Why
is that? Because first I thought, 'Oh, if only other beings would come
to this place.' Such was my heart's wish, and then these creatures came
to this place."

And the beings who were reborn there later also think, "This must be the
Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the
Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the
Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those
who have been born and those yet to be born. And we were created by him.
Why is that? Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we
arrived later."

And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and
illustrious than those who arrived later.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: "He who is the Divinity---the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher,
the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God
Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born---by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. We who were created
by that Divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to
pass away, and have come to this place." Is this how you describe in
your tradition that the origin of the world came about as created by the
God Almighty, by the
Divinity?'[1643](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1643){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1643
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'[1644](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1644){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1644
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. I understand this, and
what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding,
I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the
Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as due to those depraved by play. I go up to
them and say, 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And
they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do you describe in your
tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those depraved
by play?' But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me
in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "depraved by play". They spend too much
time laughing, playing, and making merry. And in doing so, they lose
their mindfulness, and they pass away from that host of
gods.[1645](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1645){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1645
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say, "The gods not depraved by play don't spend too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don't lose their
mindfulness, and don't pass away from that host of gods. They are
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for
all eternity. But we who were depraved by play spent too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our
mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods. We are impermanent,
not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this
place." Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of
the world came about due to those depraved by play?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. Directly knowing this,
the Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as due to those who are
malevolent.[1646](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1646){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1646
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I go up to them and say, 'Is it really true
that this is the venerables' view?' And they answer, 'Yes'. I say to
them, 'But how do you describe in your tradition that the origin of the
world came about due to those who are malevolent?' But they are stumped
by my question, and they even question me in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "malevolent". They spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they grow angry with each other, and their
bodies and minds get tired. They pass away from that host of gods.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say, "The gods who are not malevolent don't spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they don't grow angry with each other, their
bodies and minds don't get tired, and they don't pass away from that
host of gods. They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable,
remaining the same for all eternity. But we who were malevolent spent
too much time gazing at each other, so our minds grew angry with each
other, our bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host
of gods. We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass
away, and have come to this place." Is this how you describe in your
tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those who are
malevolent?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. Directly knowing this,
the Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as having arisen by chance. I go up to them and
say, 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do you describe in your tradition
that the origin of the world came about by chance?' But they are stumped
by my question, and they even question me in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "non-percipient
beings".[1647](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1647){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1647
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When perception arises they pass away from
that host of gods.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect the arising of perception, but no
further.

They say, "The self and the cosmos arose by chance. Why is that? Because
formerly I didn't exist, whereas now, having not existed, I've
transformed into the state of existing." Is this how you describe in
your tradition that the origin of the world came about by chance?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

I understand this, and what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not
misapprehend that understanding, I have realized quenching within
myself. Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins
misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:
'The ascetic Gotama has a distorted perspective, and so have his monks.

He says, "When one enters and remains in the liberation of the
beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is ugly."'

But I don't say that. I say this: 'When one enters and remains in the
liberation of the beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is
beautiful.'"

"They are the ones with a distorted perspective, sir, who regard the
Buddha and the mendicants in this way. Sir, I am quite confident that
the Buddha is capable of teaching me so that I can enter and remain in
the liberation on the beautiful."

"It's hard for you to enter and remain in the liberation on the
beautiful, since you have a different view, creed, and belief, unless
you dedicate yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition. Come
now, Bhaggava, carefully preserve the confidence that you have in me."

"If it's hard for me to enter and remain in the liberation on the
beautiful, since I have a different view, creed, and belief, unless I
dedicate myself to practice with the guidance of tradition, I shall
carefully preserve the confidence that I have in the Buddha."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the wanderer of the Bhaggava
clan approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn25">

## [DN 25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion's Roar at the Monastery of Lady Udumbarikā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udumbarikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. The Story of the Wanderer Nigrodha {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time the wanderer Nigrodha was residing in the lady
Udumbarikā's monastery for wanderers, together with a large assembly of
three thousand
wanderers.[1648](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1648){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1648
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the householder Sandhāna left Rājagaha
in the middle of the day to see the
Buddha.[1649](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1649){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1649
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he's
in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants, as
they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the wanderer Nigrodha at the lady
Udumbarikā's monastery for wanderers?" So he went to the monastery of
the wanderers.

Now at that time, Nigrodha was sitting together with a large assembly of
wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all kinds
of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state
of existence.

Nigrodha saw Sandhāna coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The householder
Sandhāna, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming. He is included
among the white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is
residing near Rājagaha. Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to
be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly
is quiet he'll see fit to approach." Then those wanderers fell silent.

Then Sandhāna went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to Nigrodha, "The way the wanderers make an
uproar as they sit together and talk about all kinds of low topics is
one thing. It's quite different to the way the Buddha frequents remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest that are quiet and still, far
from the madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for
retreat."

When Sandhāna said this, Nigrodha said to him, "Surely, householder, you
should know better! With whom does the ascetic Gotama converse? With
whom does he engage in discussion? With whom does he achieve lucidity of
wisdom? Staying in empty huts has destroyed the ascetic Gotama's wisdom.
Not frequenting assemblies, he is unable to hold a discussion. He just
lurks on the periphery. He's just like a one-eyed cow, circling around
and lurking on the
periphery.[1650](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1650){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1650
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Go on, householder! Were the ascetic Gotama
to come to this assembly, I'd sink him with just one question! I'd tie
him up like a hollow
pot!"[1651](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1651){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1651
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
this discussion between the householder Sandhāna and the wanderer
Nigrodha. Then the Buddha descended from Vulture's Peak Mountain and
went to the peacocks' feeding ground on the bank of the Sumāgadhā, where
he walked mindfully in the open air.

Nigrodha saw him, and hushed his own assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs,
don't make a sound. The ascetic Gotama is walking mindfully on the bank
of the Sumāgadhā. The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. Hopefully
if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach. If he
comes, I'll ask him this question: 'Sir, what teaching do you use to
guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in the fundamental
purpose of the spiritual life?'" Then those wanderers fell silent.

### 2. Mortification in Disgust of Sin {.subheading}

Then the Buddha went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, who said to him, "Let
the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been a
long time since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit
down, this seat is ready." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while
Nigrodha took a low seat and sat to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Nigrodha, what were you sitting talking about just now? What
conversation was left
unfinished?"[1652](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1652){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1652
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Nigrodha said, "Well, sir, I saw you walking mindfully and said: 'If the
ascetic Gotama comes, I'll ask him this question: "Sir, what teaching do
you use to guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?"' This is the conversation
that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"It's hard for you to understand this, Nigrodha, since you have a
different view, creed, and belief, unless you dedicate yourself to
practice with the guidance of tradition. Please ask me a question about
the higher disgust of sin in your own
tradition:[1653](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1653){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1653
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'How are the conditions for the fervent
mortification in disgust of sin completed, and how are they
incomplete?'"[1654](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1654){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1654
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "Oh, how incredible,
how amazing! The ascetic Gotama has such power and might! For he sets
aside his own doctrine and invites discussion on the doctrine of
others!"

Then Nigrodha, having quieted those wanderers, said to the Buddha, "Sir,
we teach fervent mortification in disgust of sin, regarding it as
essential and sticking to it. How are the conditions for the fervent
mortification in disgust of sin completed, and how are they incomplete?"

"Nigrodha, it's when a mortifier goes naked, ignoring conventions. They
lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent
to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an
invitation for a
meal.[1655](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1655){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1655
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breast-feeding, or who has a man in her home; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. They go to just one house
for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up
to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They make their bed on a plank, or the bare ground. They lie only on one
side. They wear dust and dirt. They stay in the open air. They sleep
wherever they lay their mat. They eat unnatural things, committed to the
practice of eating unnatural foods. They don't drink, committed to the
practice of not drinking liquids. They're devoted to ritual bathing
three times a day, including the evening.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin complete, or incomplete?"

"Clearly, sir, if that is so the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
is complete, not incomplete."

"But even such a completed mortification has many defects, I say."

#### 2.1. Defects {.subheading}

"But how does the Buddha say that even such a completed mortification
has many defects?"

"Firstly, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They're
happy with that, as they've got all they wished
for.[1656](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1656){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1656
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too is a
defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account of
that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for. This too is
a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too
is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account
of that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier becomes fussy about food, saying, 'This is
acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not acceptable
they give up in
expectation.[1657](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1657){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1657
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is acceptable they eat tied,
infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the
escape. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification out of
longing for possessions, honor, and popularity, thinking, 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier rebukes a certain ascetic or brahmin, 'But what
is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this ascetic's
doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or
joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is crunched together
like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' This too is a defect in that
mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. They
think, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored, respected,
esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent mortifier
who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated
among good families.' Thus they give rise to jealousy and stinginess
regarding families. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sits meditation only when people can see them.
This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sneaks about among families,
thinking,[1658](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1658){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1658
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is part of my mortification; this is
part of my mortification.' This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sometimes behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it is, even
though it isn't. Or they say it isn't, even though it is. Thus they tell
a deliberate lie. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier disagrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma, even when they make a valid point. This
too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier is irritable and acrimonious ... offensive and
contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they have corrupt wishs, falling under the
sway of corrupt wishes ... they have wrong view, being attached to an
extremist view ... they're attached to their own views, holding them
tight, and refusing to let
go.[1659](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1659){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1659
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too is a defect in that mortifier.

What do you think, Nigrodha? Are such mortifications defective or not?"

"Clearly, sir, they're defective. It's possible that a mortifier might
have all of these defects, let alone one or other of them."

#### 2.2. On Reaching the Shoots {.subheading}

"Firstly, Nigrodha, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification.
But they're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they
wished for. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
don't glorify themselves or put others down on account of that. So
they're pure on that point.

They don't become indulgent ...

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they wished
for ...

They don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of
possessions, honor, and popularity ...

They don't become indulgent because of it ... So they're pure on that
point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't become fussy about food, saying, 'This
is acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not
acceptable they give up without expectation. But what is acceptable they
eat without being tied, infatuated, attached, seeing the drawbacks, and
understanding the escape. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't undertake a practice of mortification
out of longing for possessions, honor, and popularity ... 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't rebuke a certain ascetic or brahmin,
'But what is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this
ascetic's doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems,
cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is
crunched together like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' So they're pure
on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. It
never occurs to them, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored,
respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent
mortifier who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and
venerated among good families.' Thus they don't give rise to jealousy
and stinginess regarding families. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sit meditation only when people can see
them. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sneak about among families, thinking,
'This is part of my mortification; this is part of my mortification.' So
they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier never behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it isn't when it
isn't. Or they say it is when it is. Thus they don't tell a deliberate
lie. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier agrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma when they make a valid point. So they're
pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier is not irritable and acrimonious ... offensive
and contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they don't have corrupt wishes ... and wrong
view ... they're not attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go. So they're pure on that point.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the shoots."

#### 2.3. On Reaching the Bark {.subheading}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint.[1660](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1660){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1660
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how is a mortifier restrained in the
fourfold constraint? It's when a mortifier doesn't kill living
creatures, doesn't get others to kill, and doesn't approve of
killing.[1661](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1661){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1661
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't steal, get others to steal, or
approve of stealing. They don't lie, get others to lie, or approve of
lying. They don't expect rewards from their practice, they don't lead
others to expect rewards, and they don't approve of expecting
rewards.[1662](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1662){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1662
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mortifier is restrained in the
fourfold constraint.

When a mortifier is restrained in the fourfold constraint, that is their
mortification. They step forward, not falling back. They frequent a
secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a
mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw. After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with
a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving
up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will,
full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will.
Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of
dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing
the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse,
they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside,
cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they
meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful
qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion ... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...
They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the bark."

#### 2.4. On Reaching the Softwood {.subheading}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the softwood."

### 3. On Reaching the Heartwood {.subheading}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... equanimity ... They recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin has
reached the peak and the pith. Nigrodha, remember you said this to me:
'Sir, what teaching do you use to guide your disciples, through which
they claim solace in the fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?'
Well, there is something better and finer than this. That's what I use
to guide my disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life."

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "In that case, we're
lost, and so is our tradition! We don't know anything better or finer
than that!"

### 4. Nigrodha Feels Depressed {.subheading}

Then the householder Sandhāna realized, "Obviously, now these wanderers
want to listen to what the Buddha says. They're actively listening and
trying to understand!"

So he said to the wanderer Nigrodha, "Honorable Nigrodha, remember you
said this to me: 'Surely, householder, you should know better! With whom
does the ascetic Gotama converse? With whom does he engage in
discussion? With whom does he achieve lucidity of wisdom? Staying in
empty huts has destroyed the ascetic Gotama's wisdom. Not frequenting
assemblies, he is unable to hold a discussion. He just lurks on the
periphery. He's just like a one-eyed cow, circling around and lurking on
the periphery. Please, householder, let the ascetic Gotama come to this
assembly. I'll sink him with just one question! I'll roll him over and
wrap him up like a hollow pot!' Now the Blessed One, perfected and fully
awakened, has arrived here. Why don't you send him out of the assembly
to the periphery like a one-eyed cow? Why don't you sink him with just
one question? Why don't you roll him over and wrap him up like a hollow
pot?" When he said this, Nigrodha sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Is it really true, Nigrodha---are
those your words?"

"It's true, sir, those are my words. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me."

"What do you think, Nigrodha? Have you heard that wanderers of the past
who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said that when the
perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the past came together,
they made an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all
kinds of low topics, like you do in your tradition these days? Or did
they say that the Buddhas frequented remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the madding crowd,
remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat, like I do these
days?"

"I have heard that wanderers of the past who were elderly and senior,
said that when the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the
past came together, they didn't make an uproar, like I do in my
tradition these days. They said that the Buddhas of the past frequented
remote lodgings in the wilderness, like the Buddha does these days."

"Nigrodha, you are a sensible and mature man. Did it not occur to you:
'The Blessed One is awakened, tamed, serene, crossed over, and quenched.
And he teaches Dhamma for awakening, taming, serenity, crossing over,
and extinguishment'?"

### 5. The Culmination of the Spiritual Path {.subheading}

Nigrodha said, "I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me to speak in that way. Please, sir, accept my mistake
for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Nigrodha, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to speak in that way. But since you have recognized
your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept
it. For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a
mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint
in the future. Nigrodha, this is what I say:

Let a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven years. They will live having achieved with their own insight the
goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Let alone seven years. Let a sensible person
come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and
instruct them. By practicing as instructed they will realize the supreme
end of the spiritual path in this very life, in six years ... five years
... four years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven
months ... six months ... five months ... four months ... three months
... two months ... one month ... a fortnight. Let alone a fortnight. Let
a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven days.

### 6. The Wanderers Feel Depressed {.subheading}

Nigrodha, you might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because
he wants pupils.' But you should not see it like this. Let your tutor
remain your
tutor.[1663](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1663){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1663
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our recitation.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your recitation remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our livelihood.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your livelihood remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to start doing things that are unskillful and considered unskillful
in our tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things
that are unskillful and considered unskillful in your tradition remain
as they are.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to stop doing things that are skillful and considered skillful in our
tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things that
are skillful and considered skillful in your tradition remain as they
are.

I do not speak for any of these reasons. Nigrodha, there are things that
are unskillful, corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting
in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. I teach Dhamma so
that those things may be given up. When you practice accordingly,
corrupting qualities will be given up in you and cleansing qualities
will grow. You'll enter and remain in the fullness and abundance of
wisdom, having realized it with your own insight in this very life."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, as if their minds
were possessed by Māra. Then the Buddha
thought,[1664](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1664){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1664
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "All these silly people have been touched
by the Wicked One! For not even a single one thinks, 'Come, let us lead
the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama for the sake of
enlightenment---for what do seven days matter?'"

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar in the lady Udumbarikā's
monastery for wanderers, rose into the air and landed on Vulture's Peak.
Meanwhile, the householder Sandhāna went right back to Rājagaha.

</article>
<article id="dn26">

## [DN 26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Wheel-Turning Monarch ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cakkavattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. Taking Refuge in Oneself {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Magadhans at
Mātulā.[1665](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1665){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1665
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.[1666](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1666){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1666
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant do this? They
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing
an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a
mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no other
refuge. That's how they let the teaching be their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your
fathers.[1667](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1667){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1667
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you roam inside your own territory, the
domain of your fathers, Māra won't catch you or get hold of you. It is
due to undertaking skillful qualities that merit
grows.[1668](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1668){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1668
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. King Daḷhanemi {.subheading}

Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a king named Daḷhanemi who was a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extended
to all four sides, he achieved stability in the country, and he
possessed the seven
treasures.[1669](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1669){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1669
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder,
and the commander as the seventh treasure. He had over a thousand sons
who were valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After
conquering this land girt by sea, he reigned by principle, without rod
or sword.

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King Daḷhanemi addressed one of his men, 'My good man, when you
see that the heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place,
please tell
me.'[1670](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1670){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1670
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

After many thousand years had passed, that man saw that the heavenly
wheel-treasure had receded back from its place. So he went to King
Daḷhanemi and said, 'Please sire, you should know that your heavenly
wheel-treasure has receded back from its place.'

So the king summoned the crown prince and said, 'Dear prince, my
heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place. I've heard that
when this happens to a wheel-turning monarch, he does not have long to
live. I have enjoyed human pleasures. Now it is time for me to seek
heavenly
pleasures.[1671](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1671){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1671
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Come, dear prince, rule this land
surrounded by ocean! I shall shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

And so, after carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, King
Daḷhanemi shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and
went forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1672](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1672){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1672
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seven days later the heavenly
wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. He
went to the royal sage and said, 'Please sire, you should know that the
heavenly wheel-treasure has vanished.'

When he said this, the royal sage said to him, 'Don't be unhappy at the
vanishing of the wheel-treasure. My dear, the wheel-treasure is not
inherited from your
father.[1673](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1673){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1673
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Come now, my dear, proceed in the noble
duty of a wheel-turning
monarch.[1674](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1674){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1674
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you do so, it's possible that---on a
fifteenth day sabbath, having bathed your head and gone upstairs in the
royal longhouse to observe the sabbath---the heavenly wheel-treasure
will appear to you, with a thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete
in every detail.'

#### 2.1. The Noble Duty of a Wheel-Turning Monarch {.subheading}

'But sire, what is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch?'

'Well then, my dear, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting,
and venerating principle, having principle as your flag, banner, and
authority---provide just protection and security for your court, troops,
aristocrats, vassals, brahmins and householders, people of town and
country, ascetics and brahmins, beasts and
birds.[1675](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1675){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1675
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do not let injustice prevail in the
realm.[1676](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1676){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1676
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Provide money to the penniless in the
realm.[1677](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1677){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1677
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And there are ascetics and brahmins in the realm who refrain from
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves. From time to time you should
go up to them and ask and
learn:[1678](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1678){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1678
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sirs, what is skillful? What is
unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless? What should be
cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what leads to my
lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting welfare and
happiness?" Having heard them, you should reject what is unskillful and
undertake and follow what is skillful.

This is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.'

#### 2.2. The Wheel-Treasure Appears {.subheading}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the new king to the royal sage. And he
proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.

While he was proceeding in that duty, on a fifteenth day sabbath, he had
bathed his head and gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the
sabbath. And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to him, with a
thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every detail. Seeing
this, the king thought, 'I have heard that when the heavenly
wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?'

Then the anointed king, rising from his seat and arranging his robe over
one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and besprinkled
the wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying, 'Roll forth, O
wheel-treasure! Triumph, O wheel-treasure!'

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed
it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with
his army. And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to the
wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come, great king! Welcome, great king!
We are yours, great king, instruct us.' The wheel-turning monarch said,
'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual
misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the current level
of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the eastern quarter became
his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolled towards the south. ... Having plunged into the
southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled towards the west. ...

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four
divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the
king came to stay together with his army. And any opposing rulers of the
northern quarter came to the wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come,
great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.'
The wheel-turning monarch said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not
steal. Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor.
Maintain the current level of taxation.' And so the rulers of the
northern quarter became his vassals.

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the
gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle,
illuminating the royal compound.

### 3. On Subsequent Wheel-Turning Monarchs {.subheading}

And for a second time, and a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and a
seventh time, a wheel-turning monarch was established in exactly the
same way. And after many years the seventh wheel-turning monarch went
forth, handing the realm over to the crown prince.

Seven days later the heavenly wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. But
he didn't go to the royal sage and ask about the noble duty of a
wheel-turning monarch. He just governed the country according to his own
ideas.[1679](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1679){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1679
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So governed, the country's people did not
prosper like before, as they had when former kings proceeded in the
noble duty of a wheel-turning
monarch.[1680](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1680){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1680
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the ministers and councillors, the finance ministers, military
officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers gathered and said to the
king,[1681](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1681){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1681
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sire, when governed according to your own
ideas, the country's people do not prosper like before, as they did when
former kings proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. In
your realm are found ministers and councillors, finance ministers,
military officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers---both ourselves
and others---who remember the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.
Please, Your Majesty, ask us about the noble duty of a wheel-turning
monarch. We will answer you.'

### 4. On the Period of Decline {.subheading}

So the anointed king asked the assembled ministers and councillors,
finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, and professional
advisers about the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. And they
answered him. After listening to them, he provided just protection and
security. But he did not provide money to the penniless in the
realm.[1682](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1682){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1682
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so poverty grew widespread.

When poverty was widespread, a certain person stole from others, with
the intention to commit
theft.[1683](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1683){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1683
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They arrested him and presented him to the
king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others with the
intention to commit theft.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others with the intention to commit
theft?'[1684](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1684){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1684
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to
heaven.'[1685](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1685){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1685
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

But then another man stole something from others. They arrested him and
presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from
others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is providing money to anyone
who steals from
others!'[1686](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1686){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1686
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It occurred to them, 'Why don't we steal
from others?' So then another man stole something from others.

They arrested him and presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty,
this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

Then the king thought, 'If I provide money to anyone who steals from
others, it will only increase the stealing. I'd better make an end of
this person, finish him off, and chop off his
head.'[1687](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1687){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1687
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then he ordered his men, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly
behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from
street to street and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum.
Then take him out the south gate and make an end of him, finish him off,
and chop off his head.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' they replied, and did as he commanded.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is chopping the head off
anyone who steals from others!' It occurred to them, 'We'd better have
sharp swords made. Then when we steal from others, we'll make an end of
them, finish them off, and chop off their
heads.'[1688](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1688){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1688
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They had sharp swords made. Then they
started to make raids on villages, towns, and cities, and to infest the
highways. And they chopped the heads off anyone they stole from.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty
became widespread. When poverty was widespread, theft became widespread.
When theft was widespread, swords became widespread. When swords were
widespread, killing living creatures became widespread. And for the
sentient beings among whom killing was widespread, their lifespan and
beauty declined. Those people lived for 80,000 years, but their children
lived for 40,000
years.[1689](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1689){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1689
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Among the people who lived for 40,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. They arrested him and presented him to the king,
saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'No, sire,' he said, deliberately lying.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, and killing became widespread. When killing was
widespread, lying became widespread. And for the sentient beings among
whom lying was widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those
people who lived for 40,000 years had children who lived for 20,000
years.

Among the people who lived for 20,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. Someone else reported this to the king, 'Your
Majesty, such-and-such person stole from others,' he said, going behind
his back.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, and lying became widespread. When lying was
widespread, backbiting became widespread. And for the sentient beings
among whom backbiting was widespread, their lifespan and beauty
declined. Those people who lived for 20,000 years had children who lived
for 10,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 10,000 years, some were beautiful, some
were ugly. And the ugly beings, coveting the beautiful ones, committed
adultery with the wives of
others.[1690](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1690){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1690
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, lying, and backbiting became widespread. When
backbiting was widespread, sexual misconduct became widespread. And for
the sentient beings among whom sexual misconduct was widespread, their
lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived for 10,000 years
had children who lived for 5,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 5,000 years, two things became
widespread: harsh speech and talking
nonsense.[1691](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1691){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1691
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the sentient beings among whom these
two things were widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those
people who lived for 5,000 years had some children who lived for 2,500
years, while others lived for 2,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 2,500 years, desire and ill will became
widespread. For the sentient beings among whom desire and ill will were
widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived
for 2,500 years had children who lived for 1,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 1,000 years, wrong view became
widespread.[1692](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1692){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1692
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the sentient beings among whom wrong
view was widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people
who lived for 1,000 years had children who lived for five hundred years.

Among the people who lived for five hundred years, three things became
widespread: illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong
custom.[1693](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1693){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1693
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the sentient beings among whom these
three things were widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those
people who lived for five hundred years had some children who lived for
two hundred and fifty years, while others lived for two hundred years.

Among the people who lived for two hundred and fifty years, these things
became widespread: lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics
and brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, all these
things became widespread---poverty, theft, swords, killing, lying,
backbiting, sexual misconduct, harsh speech and talking nonsense, desire
and ill will, wrong view, illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong
custom, and lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics and
brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family. For the
sentient beings among whom these things were widespread, their lifespan
and beauty declined. Those people who lived for two hundred and fifty
years had children who lived for a hundred
years.[1694](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1694){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1694
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. When People Live for Ten Years {.subheading}

There will come a time, mendicants, when these people will have children
who live for ten
years.[1695](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1695){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1695
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Among the people who live for ten years,
girls will be marriageable at
five.[1696](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1696){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1696
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The following flavors will disappear: ghee,
butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt. The best kind of food will be
finger
millet,[1697](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1697){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1697
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} just as fine rice with meat is the best
kind of food
today.[1698](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1698){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1698
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The ten ways of doing skillful deeds will totally disappear, and the ten
ways of doing unskillful deeds will explode in
popularity.[1699](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1699){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1699
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Those people will not even have the word
'skillful', still less anyone who does what is
skillful.[1700](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1700){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1700
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And anyone who disrespects mother and
father, ascetics and brahmins, and fails to honor the elders in the
family will be venerated and praised, just as the opposite is venerated
and praised today.

There'll be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or wives and
partners of tutors and respected
people.[1701](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1701){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1701
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The world will become dissolute, like goats
and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals.[1702](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1702){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1702
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They'll be full of hostility towards each other, with acute ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of murder. Even a mother will feel like this
for her child, and the child for its mother, father for child, child for
father, brother for sister, and sister for brother. They'll be just like
a deer hunter when he sees a deer---full of hostility, ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of killing.

Among the people who live for ten years, there will be an interregnum of
swords lasting seven
days.[1703](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1703){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1703
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} During that time they will see each other
as
beasts.[1704](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1704){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1704
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sharp swords will appear in their hands,
with which they'll take each other's life, crying, 'It's a beast! It's a
beast!'

But then some of those beings will think, 'Let us neither kill nor be
killed! Why don't we hide in thick grass, thick jungle, thick trees,
inaccessible riverlands, or rugged mountains and survive on forest roots
and
fruits?'[1705](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1705){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1705
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what they do.

When those seven days have passed, having emerged from their hiding
places and embraced each other, they will come together and cry in one
voice,[1706](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1706){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1706
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Fantastic, dear foe, you live! Fantastic,
dear foe, you
live!'[1707](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1707){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1707
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 6. The Period of Growth {.subheading}

Then those beings will think, 'It's because we undertook unskillful
things that we suffered such an extensive loss of our relatives. We'd
better do what's skillful. What skillful thing should we do? Why don't
we refrain from killing living creatures? Having undertaken this
skillful thing we'll live by
it.'[1708](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1708){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1708
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what they do. Because of
undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty will grow.
Those people who live for ten years will have children who live for
twenty years.

Then those beings will think, 'Because of undertaking this skillful
thing, our lifespan and beauty are growing. Why don't we do even more
skillful things? What skillful thing should we do? Why don't we refrain
from stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying ... backbiting ... harsh
speech ... and talking nonsense. Why don't we give up covetousness ...
ill will ... wrong view ... three things: illicit desire, immoral greed,
and wrong custom. Why don't we pay due respect to mother and father,
ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in our families? Having
undertaken this skillful thing we'll live by it.' So that's what they
do.

Because of undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty
will grow. Those people who live for twenty years will have children who
live for forty years. Those people who live for forty years will have
children who live for eighty years, then a hundred and sixty years,
three hundred and twenty years, six hundred and forty years, 2,000
years, 4,000 years, 8,000 years, 20,000 years, 40,000 years, and finally
80,000 years. Among the people who live for 80,000 years, girls will be
marriageable at five hundred.

### 7. The Time of King Saṅkha {.subheading}

Among the people who live for 80,000 years, there will be just three
afflictions: greed, starvation, and old
age.[1709](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1709){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1709
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Black Plum Tree Land will be successful
and prosperous. The villages, towns, and capital cities will be no more
than a chicken's flight apart. And the land will be so full of people
you'd think they were squashed together, like a thicket of rushes or
reeds. The royal capital will be Varanasi, renamed Ketumatī. And it will
be successful, prosperous, populous, full of people, with plenty of
food.[1710](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1710){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1710
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There will be 84,000 cities in the Black
Plum Tree Land, with the royal capital of Ketumatī foremost.

And in the royal capital of Ketumatī a king named Saṅkha will arise, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion will
extend to all four sides, he will achieve stability in the country, and
possess the seven
treasures.[1711](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1711){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1711
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He will have the following seven treasures:
the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the
householder, and the commander as the seventh treasure. He will have
over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of
his enemies. After conquering this land girt by sea, he will reign by
principle, without rod or sword.

### 8. The Arising of the Buddha Metteyya {.subheading}

And the Blessed One named Metteyya will arise in the world---perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened,
blessed---[1712](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1712){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1712
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} just as I have arisen
today.[1713](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1713){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1713
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He will realize with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and make it known to others,
just as I do today. He will teach the Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he will reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure, just as I do today. He will lead a Saṅgha of many
thousand mendicants, just as I lead a Saṅgha of many hundreds
today.[1714](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1714){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1714
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then King Saṅkha will have the sacrificial post once built by King
Mahāpanāda raised
up.[1715](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1715){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1715
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having reigned, he will abdicate, offering
charity to ascetics and brahmins, paupers, vagrants, supplicants, and
beggars. Then, having shaved off his hair and beard and dressed in ocher
robes, he will go forth from the lay life to homelessness in the Buddha
Metteyya's
presence.[1716](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1716){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1716
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Soon after going forth, living withdrawn,
diligent, keen, and resolute, he will realize the supreme end of the
spiritual path in this very life. He will live having achieved with his
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.

Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge. And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no
other refuge. That's how they let the teaching be their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

### 9. On Long Life and Beauty for Mendicants {.subheading}

Mendicants, you should roam inside your own territory, the domain of
your fathers. Doing so, you will grow in life span, beauty, happiness,
wealth, and power.

And what is long life for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. Having developed and cultivated these
four bases of psychic power they may, if they wish, live for the proper
lifespan or what's left of it. This is long life for a mendicant.

And what is beauty for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. This is beauty for a mendicant.

And what is happiness for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. This is happiness for a mendicant.

And what is wealth for a mendicant? It's when a monk meditates spreading
a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ...
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
This is wealth for a mendicant.

And what is power for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is power for a mendicant.

Mendicants, I do not see a single power so hard to defeat as the power
of Māra. It is due to undertaking skillful qualities that merit grows."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn27">

## [DN 27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [What Came First ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggaññasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1717](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1717){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1717
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.[1718](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1718){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1718
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were living on probation among
the mendicants in hopes of being
ordained.[1719](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1719){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1719
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came
downstairs from the longhouse and was walking mindfully in the open air,
beneath the shade of the longhouse.

Vāseṭṭha saw
him[1720](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1720){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1720
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and said to Bhāradvāja, "Reverend
Bhāradvāja, the Buddha is walking mindfully in the open air, beneath the
shade of the longhouse. Come, reverend, let's go to the Buddha.
Hopefully we'll get to hear a Dhamma talk from him."

"Yes, reverend," replied Bhāradvāja.

So they went to the Buddha, bowed, and walked beside him.

Then the Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha, "Vāseṭṭha, you are both brahmins by
birth and family, and have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness
from a brahmin family. I hope you don't have to suffer abuse and insults
from the brahmins."

"Actually, sir, the brahmins do insult and abuse us with their typical
insults to the fullest extent."

"But how do the brahmins insult you?"

"Sir, the brahmins say: 'Only brahmins are the best class; other classes
are
inferior.[1721](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1721){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1721
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are the light class; other
classes are
dark.[1722](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1722){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1722
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are purified, not
others.[1723](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1723){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1723
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are the Divinity's true-born
sons, born from his mouth, born of the Divinity, created by the
Divinity, heirs of the Divinity. You've both abandoned the best class to
join an inferior class, namely these shavelings, fake ascetics,
primitives, black spawn from the feet of our
kinsman.[1724](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1724){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1724
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is not right, it's not proper!' That's
how the brahmins insult us."

"Actually, Vāseṭṭha, the brahmins are forgetting their tradition when
they say this to you. For brahmin women are seen menstruating, being
pregnant, giving birth, and
breast-feeding.[1725](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1725){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1725
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Yet even though they're born from a brahmin
womb they say: 'Only brahmins are the best class; other classes are
inferior. Only brahmins are the light class; other classes are dark.
Only brahmins are purified, not others. Only brahmins are the Divinity's
true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of the Divinity, created by
the Divinity, heirs of the Divinity.' They misrepresent the brahmins,
speak falsely, and create much wickedness.

### 1. Purification in the Four Classes {.subheading}

Vāseṭṭha, there are these four classes: aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,
and menials. Some aristocrats kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. These
things are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be cultivated, unworthy of
the noble ones---and are reckoned as such. They are dark deeds with dark
results, criticized by sensible people. Such things are exhibited in
some
aristocrats.[1726](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1726){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1726
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they are also seen among some brahmins,
peasants, and menials.

But some aristocrats refrain from killing living creatures, stealing,
and committing sexual misconduct. They refrain from speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, and nonsensical. And they're content, kind-hearted,
with right view. These things are skillful, blameless, to be cultivated,
worthy of the noble ones---and are reckoned as such. They are bright
deeds with bright results, praised by sensible people. Such things are
exhibited in some aristocrats. And they are also seen among some
brahmins, peasants, and menials.

Both these things occur like this, mixed up in these four classes---the
dark and the bright, that which is praised and that which is criticized
by sensible people. Yet of this the brahmins say: 'Only brahmins are the
best class; other classes are inferior. Only brahmins are the light
class; other classes are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not others.
Only brahmins are the Divinity's true-born sons, born from his mouth,
born of the Divinity, created by the Divinity, heirs of the Divinity.'

Sensible people don't acknowledge this. Why is that? Because any
mendicant from these four classes who is perfected---with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment---is said to be foremost by virtue of principle, not
against
principle.[1727](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1727){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1727
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best thing
for people in both this life and the next.

And here's a way to understand how this is so.

King Pasenadi of Kosala knows that the ascetic Gotama has gone forth
from the neighboring clan of the Sakyans. And the Sakyans are his
vassals.[1728](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1728){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1728
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Sakyans show deference to King Pasenadi
by bowing down, rising up, greeting him with joined palms, and observing
proper etiquette for him. Now, King Pasenadi shows the same kind of
deference to the Realized One. But he doesn't think: 'The ascetic Gotama
is well-born, I am
ill-born.[1729](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1729){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1729
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He is powerful, I am weak. He is handsome,
I am ugly. He is influential, I am insignificant.' Rather, in showing
such deference to the Realized One he is only honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle. And here's another way to understand how principle
is the best thing for people in both this life and the next.

Vāseṭṭha, you have different births, names, clans, and families, yet
have gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1730](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1730){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1730
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they ask you what you are, you claim
to be ascetics, followers of the Sakyan. But only when someone has faith
in the Realized One---settled, rooted, and planted deep, strong, not to
be shifted by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by
anyone in the world---is it appropriate for them to say: 'I am the
Buddha's true-born son, born from his mouth, born of principle, created
by principle, heir to
principle.'[1731](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1731){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1731
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? For these are terms for the
Realized One: 'the embodiment of principle', and 'the embodiment of
divinity', and 'the manifestation of principle', and 'the manifestation
of
divinity'.[1732](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1732){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1732
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There comes a time when, Vāseṭṭha, after a very long period has passed,
this cosmos
contracts.[1733](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1733){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1733
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings
are mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance. There they are
mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos expands. As the cosmos expands, sentient beings mostly pass away
from that host of radiant deities and come back to this
realm.[1734](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1734){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1734
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Here they are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long
time.[1735](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1735){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1735
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 2. The Earth's Nectar Appears {.subheading}

But the single mass of water at that time was utterly
dark.[1736](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1736){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1736
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The moon and sun were not found, nor were
stars and constellations, day and night, months and fortnights, years
and seasons, or male and female. Beings were simply known as
'beings'.[1737](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1737){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1737
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} After a very long period had passed, the
earth's nectar curdled in the
water.[1738](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1738){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1738
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It appeared just like the curd on top of
hot milk-rice as it cools. It was beautiful, fragrant, and delicious,
like ghee or butter. And it was as sweet as pure dwarf-bee
honey.[1739](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1739){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1739
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, one of those beings was reckless.
Thinking, 'Oh my, what might this be?' they tasted the earth's nectar
with their
finger.[1740](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1740){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1740
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They enjoyed it, and craving was born in
them.[1741](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1741){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1741
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And other beings, following that being's
example, tasted the earth's nectar with their fingers. They too enjoyed
it, and craving was born in them.

### 3. The Moon and Sun Appear {.subheading}

Then those beings started to eat the earth's nectar, breaking it into
lumps. But when they did this their luminosity vanished. And with the
vanishing of their luminosity the moon and sun appeared, stars and
constellations appeared, days and nights were distinguished, and so were
months and fortnights, and years and seasons. So far had the world
evolved once more.

Then those beings eating the earth's nectar, with that as their food and
nourishment, remained for a very long time. But so long as they ate that
earth's nectar, their bodies became more solid and they diverged in
appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful beings looked
down on the ugly
ones:[1742](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1742){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1742
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'We're more beautiful, they're the ugly
ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the earth's nectar
vanish. They gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, what a taste! Oh, what
a taste!' And even today when people get something tasty they say: 'Oh,
what a taste! Oh, what a taste!' They're just remembering an ancient
primordial saying, but they don't understand what it
means.[1743](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1743){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1743
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 4. Ground-Fungus {.subheading}

When the earth's nectar had vanished, ground-fungus appeared to those
beings.[1744](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1744){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1744
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It appeared just like a mushroom. It was
beautiful, fragrant, and delicious, like ghee or butter. And it was as
sweet as pure dwarf-bee honey.

Then those beings started to eat the ground-fungus. With that as their
food and nourishment, they remained for a very long time. But so long as
they ate that ground-fungus, their bodies became more solid and they
diverged in appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful
beings looked down on the ugly ones: 'We're more beautiful, they're the
ugly ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the ground-fungus
vanish.

### 5. Bursting Pods {.subheading}

When the ground-fungus had vanished, bursting pods appeared, like the
fruit of the kadam
tree.[1745](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1745){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1745
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They were beautiful, fragrant, and
delicious, like ghee or butter. And they were as sweet as pure dwarf-bee
honey.

Then those beings started to eat the bursting pods. With that as their
food and nourishment, they remained for a very long time. But so long as
they ate those bursting pods, their bodies became more solid and they
diverged in appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful
beings looked down on the ugly ones: 'We're more beautiful, they're the
ugly ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the bursting pods
vanish.

They gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, what we've lost! Oh, what
we've lost---those bursting pods!' And even today when people experience
suffering they say: 'Oh, what we've lost! Oh, what we've lost!' They're
just remembering an ancient primordial saying, but they don't understand
what it means.

### 6. Ripe Untilled Rice {.subheading}

When the bursting pods had vanished, ripe untilled rice appeared to
those beings. It had no powder or husk, pure and fragrant, with only the
rice-grain. What they took for supper in the evening, by the morning had
grown back and ripened. And what they took for breakfast in the morning
had grown back and ripened by the evening, leaving no trace showing.
Then those beings eating the ripe untilled rice, with that as their food
and nourishment, remained for a very long time.

### 7. Gender Appears {.subheading}

But so long as they ate that ripe untilled rice, their bodies became
more solid and they diverged in appearance. And female characteristics
appeared on women, while male characteristics appeared on
men.[1746](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1746){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1746
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Women spent too much time gazing at men,
and men at women. They became lustful, and their bodies burned with
fever. Due to this fever they had sex with each other.

Those who saw them having sex pelted them with dirt, clods, or cow-dung,
saying,[1747](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1747){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1747
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Get lost, filth! Get lost,
filth\![1748](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1748){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1748
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How on earth can one being do that to
another?'[1749](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1749){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1749
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And even today people in some countries,
when carrying a bride off, pelt her with dirt, clods, or
cow-dung.[1750](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1750){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1750
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're just remembering an ancient
primordial saying, but they don't understand what it means.

### 8. Sexual Intercourse {.subheading}

What was deemed as unprincipled at that time, these days is deemed as
principled.[1751](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1751){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1751
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The beings who had sex together weren't
allowed to enter a village or town for one or two months. Ever since
they excessively threw themselves into immorality, they started to make
buildings to hide their immoral
deeds.[1752](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1752){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1752
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then one of those beings of idle
disposition thought, 'Hey now, why should I be bothered to gather rice
in the evening for supper, and in the morning for breakfast? Why don't I
gather rice for supper and breakfast all at
once?'[1753](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1753){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1753
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So that's what he did. Then one of the other beings approached that
being and said, 'Come, good being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's
no need, good being! I gathered rice for supper and breakfast all at
once.' So that being, following their example, gathered rice for two
days all at once, thinking: 'This seems
fine.'[1754](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1754){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1754
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then one of the other beings approached that being and said, 'Come, good
being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's no need, good being! I
gathered rice for two days all at once.' So that being, following their
example, gathered rice for four days all at once, thinking: 'This seems
fine.'

Then one of the other beings approached that being and said, 'Come, good
being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's no need, good being! I
gathered rice for four days all at once.' So that being, following their
example, gathered rice for eight days all at once, thinking: 'This seems
fine.'

But when they started to store up rice to eat, the rice grains became
wrapped in powder and husk, it didn't grow back after reaping, leaving a
trace showing, and the rice stood in
clumps.[1755](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1755){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1755
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 9. Dividing the Rice {.subheading}

Then those beings gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, how wicked things
have appeared among
beings\![1756](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1756){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1756
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For we used to be mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and we
remained like that for a very long time. After a very long period had
passed, the earth's nectar curdled in the water. But due to bad,
unskillful things among us, the earth's nectar vanished, then the
ground-fungus vanished, the bursting pods vanished, and now the rice
grains have become wrapped in powder and husk, it doesn't grow back
after reaping, traces are left showing, and the rice stands in clumps.
We'd better divide up the rice and lay down
boundaries.'[1757](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1757){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1757
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what they did.

Now, one of those beings was reckless. While guarding their own share
they took another's share without it being given, and ate
it.[1758](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1758){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1758
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They grabbed the one who had done this and said, 'You have done a bad
thing, good being, in that while guarding your own share you took
another's share without it being given, and ate it. Do not do such a
thing again.'

'Yes, sirs,' replied that being. But for a second time, and a third time
they did the same thing, and were told not to
continue.[1759](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1759){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1759
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And then they struck that being, some with
fists, others with stones, and still others with
rods.[1760](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1760){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1760
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From that day on stealing was found, and
blame, and lying, and the taking up of
rods.[1761](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1761){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1761
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 10. The Elected King {.subheading}

Then those beings gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, how wicked things
have appeared among beings, in that stealing is found, and blaming and
lying and the taking up of rods! Why don't we elect one being who would
rightly accuse those who deserve it, blame those who deserve it, and
expel those who deserve
it?[1762](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1762){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1762
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We shall pay them with a share of
rice.'[1763](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1763){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1763
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then those beings approached the being among them who was most
attractive, good-looking, lovely, and illustrious, and
said,[1764](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1764){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1764
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Come, good being, rightly accuse those who
deserve it, blame those who deserve it, and banish those who deserve
it.[1765](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1765){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1765
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We shall pay you with a share of rice.'
'Yes, sirs,' replied that being. They acted accordingly, and were paid
with a share of rice.

'Elected by the people', Vāseṭṭha, is the meaning of 'elected one', the
first term applied to
them.[1766](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1766){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1766
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Lord of the fields' is the meaning of 'aristocrat', the second term
applied to
them.[1767](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1767){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1767
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'They please others with principle' is the meaning of 'king', the third
term applied to
them.[1768](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1768){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1768
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And that, Vāseṭṭha, is how the ancient primordial terms for the circle
of aristocrats were created; for those very beings, not others; for
those like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against
principle. For principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best thing for people in both
this life and the next.

### 11. The Circle of Brahmins {.subheading}

Then some of those same beings thought, 'Oh, how wicked things have
appeared among beings, in that stealing is found, and blaming and lying
and the taking up of rods and banishment! Why don't we set aside bad,
unskillful
things?'[1769](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1769){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1769
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what they did.

'They set aside bad, unskillful things' is the meaning of 'brahmin', the
first term applied to
them.[1770](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1770){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1770
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They built leaf huts in a wilderness region where they meditated pure
and bright, without lighting cooking fires or digging the soil. They
came down in the morning for breakfast and in the evening for supper to
the village, town, or royal capital seeking a
meal.[1771](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1771){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1771
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they had obtained food they continued
to meditate in the leaf huts.

When people noticed this they said, 'These beings build leaf huts in a
wilderness region where they meditate pure and bright, without lighting
cooking fires or digging the soil. They come down in the morning for
breakfast and in the evening for supper to the village, town, or royal
capital seeking a meal. When they have obtained food they continue to
meditate in the leaf huts.'

'They meditate' is the meaning of 'meditator', the second term applied
to
them.[1772](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1772){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1772
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But some of those beings were unable to keep up with their meditation in
the leaf huts in the wilderness. They came down to the neighborhood of a
village or town where they dwelt compiling
texts.[1773](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1773){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1773
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When people noticed this they said, 'These beings were unable to keep up
with their meditation in the leaf huts in the wilderness. They came down
to the neighborhood of a village or town where they dwelt compiling
texts. Now they don't meditate.'

'Now they don't meditate' is the meaning of 'reciter', the third term
applied to
them.[1774](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1774){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1774
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What was deemed as worse at that time,
these days is deemed as best.

And that, Vāseṭṭha, is how the ancient primordial terms for the circle
of brahmins were created; for those very beings, not others; for those
like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against principle.
For principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best thing for people in both this life
and the next.

### 12. The Circle of Peasants {.subheading}

Some of those same beings, taking up an active sex life, applied
themselves to various jobs.

'Having taken up an active sex life, they apply themselves to various
jobs' is the meaning of 'peasant', the term applied to
them.[1775](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1775){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1775
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And that, Vāseṭṭha, is how the ancient primordial term for the circle of
peasants was created; for those very beings, not others; for those like
them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against principle. For
principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best thing for people in both this life and
the next.

### 13. The Circle of Menials {.subheading}

The remaining beings lived by venal hunting and minor tasks.

'They live by venal hunting and minor tasks' is the meaning of 'menial',
the term applied to
them.[1776](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1776){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1776
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And that, Vāseṭṭha, is how the ancient primordial term for the circle of
menials was created; for those very beings, not others; for those like
them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against principle. For
principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best thing for people in both this life and
the next.

There came a time when an
aristocrat,[1777](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1777){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1777
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} brahmin, peasant, or menial, deprecating
their own vocation, went forth from the lay life to homelessness,
thinking, 'I will be an ascetic.'

From these four circles, Vāseṭṭha, the circle of ascetics was created;
for those very beings, not others; for those like them, not unlike; by
virtue of principle, not against principle. For principle, Vāseṭṭha, is
the best thing for people in both this life and the next.

### 14. On Bad Conduct {.subheading}

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do bad things by
way of body, speech, and mind. They have wrong view, and they act out of
that wrong view. And because of that, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do good things
by way of body, speech, and mind. They have right view, and they act out
of that right view. And because of that, when their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do mixed things
by way of body, speech, and mind. They have mixed view, and they act out
of that mixed view. And because of that, when their body breaks up,
after death, they experience both pleasure and pain.

### 15. The Qualities That Lead to Awakening {.subheading}

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic who is restrained in
body, speech, and mind, and develops the seven qualities that lead to
awakening, becomes extinguished in this very life.

Any mendicant from these four classes who is perfected---with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment---is said to be the foremost by virtue of
principle, not against principle. For principle, Vāseṭṭha, is the best
thing for people in both this life and the next.

The divinity Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse:

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans.'

That verse was well sung by the Divinity Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung;
well spoken, not poorly spoken; beneficial, not harmful, and I agree
with
it.[1778](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1778){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1778
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I also say:

> The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn28">

## [DN 28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring Confidence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sampasādanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. Sāriputta's Lion's Roar {.subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Nāḷandā in Pāvārika's mango
grove.[1779](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1779){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1779
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have such confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no
other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, Sāriputta. You've roared a
definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such confidence in
the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or brahmin---whether
past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is superior to the
Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, Sāriputta, given that you don't comprehend the minds of
Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing, making
such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the teaching. Suppose
there were a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known
people in. As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn't see a hole or
cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip out. They'd
think, 'Whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of
them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'

Sir, once I approached the Buddha to listen to the
teaching.[1780](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1780){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1780
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He explained Dhamma with its higher and
higher stages, with its better and better stages, with its dark and
bright sides. When I directly knew a certain principle of those
teachings, in accordance with how I was taught, I came to a conclusion
about the teachings. I had confidence in the
Teacher:[1781](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1781){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1781
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened
Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

#### 1.1. Teaching Skillful Qualities {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches skillful qualities is
unsurpassable. This consists of such skillful qualities as the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases
of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold
path.[1782](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1782){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1782
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} By these a mendicant realizes the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is unsurpassable when it comes to skillful qualities.
The Buddha understands this without exception. There is nothing to be
understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or brahmin might be
superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it comes to skillful
qualities.

#### 1.2. Describing the Sense Fields {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of the sense
fields is unsurpassable. There are these six interior and exterior sense
fields.[1783](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1783){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1783
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the
nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the
mind and ideas. This is unsurpassable when it comes to describing the
sense fields. The Buddha understands this without exception. There is
nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or brahmin
might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it comes to
describing the sense fields.

#### 1.3. The Conception of the Embryo {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the conception of the embryo
is unsurpassable. There are these four kinds of conception.

Firstly, someone is unaware when conceived in their mother's womb,
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
first kind of
conception.[1784](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1784){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1784
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb, but
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
second kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, and aware as they emerge. This is the fourth
kind of conception.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the conception of the embryo.

#### 1.4. Ways of Revealing {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different ways of
revealing is unsurpassable. There are these four ways of
revealing.[1785](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1785){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1785
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Firstly, someone reveals by means of a sign, 'This is what you're
thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And
even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not
otherwise. This is the first way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or non-humans
or deities, 'This is what you're thinking, such is your thought, and
thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this many times, it
turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the second way of
revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought spreading
as someone thinks and considers, 'This is what you're thinking, such is
your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal
this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the
third way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone comprehends the mind of a person who has attained
the immersion that's free of placing the mind and keeping it connected.
They understand, 'Judging by the way this person's intentions are
directed, immediately after this mind state, they'll think this
thought.' And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly
so, not otherwise. This is the fourth way of revealing.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of revealing.

#### 1.5. Attainments of Vision {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the attainments of vision is
unsurpassable. There are these four attainments of vision.

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they examine their own body
up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs,
wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of
filth.[1786](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1786){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1786
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' This is the first
attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood.[1787](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1787){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1787
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. And they understand of a person that their stream of
consciousness is consistent on both sides: established in both this
world and the
next.[1788](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1788){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1788
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the third attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. They understand of a person that their stream of consciousness is
consistent on both sides: not established in either this world or the
next. This is the fourth attainment of vision.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to attainments of vision.

#### 1.6. Descriptions of Persons {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of persons is
unsurpassable. There are these seven persons. One freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, a follower by
faith.[1789](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1789){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1789
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is unsurpassable when it comes to the
description of persons.

#### 1.7. Kinds of Striving {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the kinds of striving is
unsurpassable. There are these seven awakening factors: the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and
equanimity.[1790](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1790){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1790
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is unsurpassable when it comes to the
kinds of striving.

#### 1.8. Ways of Practice {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the ways of practice is
unsurpassable.[1791](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1791){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1791
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

Of these, the painful practice with slow insight is said to be inferior
both ways: because it's painful and because it's slow. The painful
practice with swift insight is said to be inferior because it's painful.
The pleasant practice with slow insight is said to be inferior because
it's slow. But the pleasant practice with swift insight is said to be
superior both ways: because it's pleasant and because it's swift.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of practice.

#### 1.9. Behavior in Speech {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches behavior in speech is
unsurpassable. It's when someone doesn't use speech that's connected
with lying, or divisive, or backbiting, or aggressively trying to
win.[1792](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1792){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1792
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They speak only wise counsel, valuable and
timely. This is unsurpassable when it comes to behavior in speech.

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches a person's ethical behavior is
unsurpassable.[1793](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1793){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1793
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone is honest and faithful.
They don't use deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't
use material things to chase after other material things. They guard the
sense doors and eat in moderation. They're fair, dedicated to
wakefulness, tireless, energetic, and meditative. They have good memory,
eloquence, range, retention, and thoughtfulness. They're not greedy for
sensual pleasures. They are mindful and
alert.[1794](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1794){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1794
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is unsurpassable when it comes to a
person's ethical behavior.

#### 1.10. Responsiveness to Instruction {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction is unsurpassable. There are these four
degrees of responsiveness to
instruction.[1795](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1795){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1795
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual:[1796](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1796){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1796
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'By practicing as instructed this
individual will, with the ending of three fetters, become a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.' The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual: 'By practicing as instructed this individual will, with the
ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
become a once-returner. They will come back to this world once only,
then make an end of suffering.' The Buddha knows by rationally applying
the mind to another individual: 'By practicing as instructed this
individual will, with the ending of the five lower fetters, be reborn
spontaneously. They will be extinguished there, and are not liable to
return from that world.' The Buddha knows by rationally applying the
mind to another individual: 'By practicing as instructed this individual
will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.'

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction.

#### 1.11. The Knowledge and Freedom of Others {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge and freedom of
other individuals is
unsurpassable.[1797](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1797){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1797
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha knows by rationally applying the
mind to another individual: 'With the ending of three fetters this
individual will become a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening.' The Buddha knows by rationally
applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of three
fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, this individual
will become a once-returner. They will come back to this world once
only, then make an end of suffering.' The Buddha knows by rationally
applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of the five
lower fetters, this individual will be reborn spontaneously. They will
be extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.'
The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another individual:
'This individual will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' This is unsurpassable when it
comes to the knowledge and freedom of other individuals.

#### 1.12. Eternalism {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches eternalist doctrines is
unsurpassable. There are these three eternalist
doctrines.[1798](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1798){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1798
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect many hundreds
of thousands of past lives, with features and details. They say, 'I know
that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know whether
in the future the cosmos will expand or
contract.[1799](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1799){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1799
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The self and the cosmos are eternal,
barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They
remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and
transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This is the first eternalist
doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as ten eons of the expansion and
contraction of the
cosmos,[1800](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1800){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1800
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the second eternalist doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as forty eons of the expansion
and contraction of the cosmos, with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the third eternalist doctrine.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to eternalist doctrines.

#### 1.13. Recollecting Past Lives {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of recollecting
past lives is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint
of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application
of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details. Sir, there are gods
whose life span cannot be reckoned or calculated. Still, no matter what
incarnation they have previously been reborn in---whether formed or
formless or percipient or non-percipient or neither percipient nor
non-percipient---they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. This is unsurpassable when it comes to the
knowledge of recollecting past lives.

#### 1.14. Death and Rebirth {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of the death and
rebirth of sentient beings is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or
brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and
right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn--- inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is unsurpassable when
it comes to the knowledge of death and rebirth.

#### 1.15. Psychic Powers {.subheading}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches psychic power is
unsurpassable. There are these two kinds of psychic power. There are
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be
ignoble.[1801](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1801){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1801
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there are psychic powers that are free
of defilements and attachments, and are said to be noble. What are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble? It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of
keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. These are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble.

But what are the psychic powers that are free of defilements and
attachments, and are said to be noble? It's when, if a mendicant wishes:
'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's
what they
do.[1802](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1802){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1802
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving
the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish:
'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do. These are the psychic powers that are free of defilements
and attachments, and are said to be noble. This is unsurpassable when it
comes to psychic powers. The Buddha understands this without exception.
There is nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or
brahmin might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it
comes to psychic powers.

#### 1.16. The Four Absorptions {.subheading}

The Buddha has achieved what should be achieved by a faithful gentleman
by being energetic and strong, by human strength, energy, vigor, and
exertion. The Buddha doesn't indulge in sensual pleasures, which are
low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And he doesn't indulge in
self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and
pointless.[1803](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1803){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1803
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He gets the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when he
wants, without trouble or
difficulty.[1804](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1804){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1804
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 1.17. On Being Questioned {.subheading}

Sir, if they were to ask me, 'Reverend Sāriputta, is there any other
ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose direct
knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?' I would
tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'Reverend Sāriputta, is there any other
ascetic or brahmin---whether past or future---whose direct knowledge is
equal to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?' I would tell them
'Yes.' But if they were to ask: 'Reverend Sāriputta, is there any other
ascetic or brahmin at present whose direct knowledge is equal to the
Buddha when it comes to awakening?' I would tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'But why does Venerable Sāriputta grant this
in respect of some but not others?' I would answer them like
this,[1805](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1805){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1805
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverends, I have heard and learned this
in the presence of the Buddha: "The perfected ones, fully awakened
Buddhas of the past were equal in awakening to
myself."[1806](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1806){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1806
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And I have heard and learned this in the
presence of the Buddha: "The perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas of
the future will be equal in awakening to myself." And I have also heard
and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: "It's impossible for two
perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system
at the same
time."'[1807](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1807){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1807
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Answering this way, I trust that I repeated what the Buddha has said,
and didn't misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my explanation was
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, Sāriputta, in answering this way you repeat what I've said, and
don't misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with
the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or
criticism."

### 2. Incredible and Amazing {.subheading}

When he had spoken, Venerable Udāyī said to the
Buddha,[1808](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1808){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1808
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The
Realized One has so few wishes, such contentment, such self-effacement!
For even though the Realized One has such power and might, he will not
make a display of himself. If the wanderers following other religions
were to see even a single one of these qualities in themselves they'd
carry around a banner to that effect. It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! The Realized One has so few wishes, such contentment, such
self-effacement! For even though the Realized One has such power and
might, he will not make a display of himself."

"See, Udāyī, how the Realized One has so few wishes, such contentment,
such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One has such power
and might, he will not make a display of himself. If the wanderers
following other religions were to see even a single one of these
qualities in themselves they'd carry around a banner to that effect.
See, Udāyī, how the Realized One has so few wishes, such contentment,
such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One has such power
and might, he will not make a display of himself."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta, "So Sāriputta, you should
frequently speak this exposition of the teaching to the monks, nuns,
laymen, and laywomen. Though there will be some silly people who have
doubt or uncertainty regarding the Realized One, when they hear this
exposition of the teaching they'll give up that doubt or uncertainty."

That's how Venerable Sāriputta declared his confidence in the Buddha's
presence. And that's why the name of this discussion is "Inspiring
Confidence".

</article>
<article id="dn29">

## [DN 29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Impressive Discourse ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāsādikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans in a stilt longhouse in a mango grove belonging to those
Sakyans named
Vedhaññā.[1809](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1809){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1809
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had recently passed
away at
Pāvā.[1810](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1810){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1810
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With his passing the Jain ascetics split,
dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling, and disputing,
continually wounding each other with barbed
words:[1811](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1811){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1811
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"You don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this
teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training?
You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you
don't. You said last what you should have said first. You said first
what you should have said last. What you've thought so much about has
been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine!
You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics.[1812](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1812){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1812
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the Jain Ñātika's white-clothed lay
disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain
ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with
broken monument and without a
refuge.[1813](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1813){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1813
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then, after completing the rainy season residence near Pāvā, the
novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at Sāma village. He bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him what had
happened.[1814](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1814){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1814
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Ānanda said to him, "Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this
matter. Come, let's go to the Buddha and tell him about this."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda.

Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened.

### 1. The Teaching of the Unawakened {.subheading}

"That's what happens, Cunda, when a teaching and training is poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened
Buddha.[1815](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1815){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1815
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching does not practice in line with the teachings,
does not practice following that procedure, does not live in line with
the teaching. They proceed having turned away from that
teaching.[1816](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1816){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1816
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should say this to them, 'You're
fortunate, reverend, you're so very fortunate! For your teacher is not
awakened, and their teaching is poorly explained and poorly propounded,
not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not
a fully awakened Buddha. But you don't practice in line with that
teaching, you don't practice following that procedure, you don't live in
line with the teaching. You proceed having turned away from that
teaching.' In such a case the teacher and the teaching are to blame, but
the disciple deserves
praise.[1817](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1817){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1817
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose someone was to say to such a
disciple, 'Come on, venerable, practice as taught and pointed out by
your teacher.' The one who encourages, the one who they encourage, and
the one who practices accordingly all create much
wickedness.[1818](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1818){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1818
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? It's because that teaching and
training is poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating,
not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened
Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching practices in line with the teachings,
practices following that procedure, lives in line with the teaching.
They proceed having undertaken that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is not awakened, and their teaching is poorly explained and poorly
propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. And you practice in line
with that teaching, you practice following that procedure, you live in
line with the teaching. You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In
such a case the teacher, the teaching, and the disciple are all to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the
venerable is practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.'
The one who praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being
praised, rouses up even more energy all create much wickedness. Why is
that? It's because that teaching and training is poorly explained and
poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.

### 2. The Teaching of the Awakened {.subheading}

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching does not practice in line with the teachings, does not practice
following that procedure, does not live in line with the teaching. They
proceed having turned away from that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. But you don't practice in line with that teaching, you
don't practice following that procedure, you don't live in line with the
teaching. You proceed having turned away from that teaching.' In such a
case the teacher and the teaching deserve praise, but the disciple is to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Come on,
venerable, practice as taught and pointed out by your teacher.' The one
who encourages, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much merit. Why is that? It's because that
teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching practices in line with the teachings, practices following that
procedure, lives in line with the teaching. They proceed having
undertaken that teaching. You should say this to them, 'You're
fortunate, reverend, you're so very fortunate! For your teacher is
awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. And you practice in line with that teaching, you
practice following that procedure, you live in line with the teaching.
You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In such a case the
teacher, the teaching, and the disciple all deserve praise. Suppose
someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the venerable is
practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.' The one who
praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being praised, rouses
up even more energy all create much merit. Why is that? It's because
that teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

### 3. When Disciples Have Regrets {.subheading}

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. But the disciples have not been educated in the meaning
of that good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure has not been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have
not all been collected; and it has not been well proclaimed with its
demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and
humans.[1819](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1819){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1819
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And then their teacher passes away. When
such a teacher has passed away the disciples are tormented by regrets.
Why is that? They think: 'Our teacher was perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha. His teaching was well explained, but we were not educated in its
meaning. And the spiritual practice was not fully disclosed and revealed
to us; its sayings have not all been collected; and it has not been well
proclaimed with its demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and
humans. And then our teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has
passed away the disciples are tormented by regrets.

### 4. When Disciples Have No Regrets {.subheading}

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. The disciples have been educated in the meaning of that
good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure
has been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have all been
collected; and it has been well proclaimed with its demonstrable basis
wherever there are gods and humans. And then their teacher passes away.
When such a teacher has passed away the disciples are free of regrets.
Why is that? They think: 'Our teacher was perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha. His teaching was well explained, we were educated in its
meaning, and the spiritual practice was fully disclosed to us. And then
our teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has passed away the
disciples are free of regrets.

### 5. On the Incomplete Spiritual Path, Etc. {.subheading}

Now suppose, Cunda, that a spiritual path possesses those factors. But
the teacher is not senior, long standing, long gone forth, advanced in
years, and reached the final stage of life. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior. But there are no senior monk disciples who are
competent, educated, assured, have attained sanctuary from the
yoke,[1820](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1820){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1820
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} who can rightly explain the true teaching,
and who can legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others
that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis. Then that spiritual
path is incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, then that spiritual path is
complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior and there are competent senior monks. But there are no
competent middle monks, junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior
nuns, celibate white-clothed laymen, white-clothed laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate white-clothed laywomen, white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures. ... There are white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures, but the spiritual path is not
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans ... the spiritual path is
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans, but it has not reached
the peak of material things and fame. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, middle monks, junior monks,
senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen, laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, laywomen enjoying sensual
pleasures, and the spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans, and it has reached the peak of material things and
fame, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

I, Cunda, am a teacher who has arisen in the world today, perfected and
fully awakened. The teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is fully
awakened. My disciples have been educated in the meaning of that good
teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure has
been disclosed and revealed to them with all its collected sayings, with
its demonstrable basis, well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans. I am a teacher today who is senior, long standing, long gone
forth, advanced in years, and have reached the final stage of life.

I have today disciples who are competent senior monks, middle monks,
junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen,
laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, and laywomen
enjoying sensual pleasures. Today my spiritual path is successful and
prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever
there are gods and humans.

Of all the teachers in the world today, Cunda, I don't see even a single
one who has reached the peak of material things and fame like me. Of all
the spiritual communities and groups in the world today, Cunda, I don't
see even a single one who has reached the pinnacle of material things
and fame like the mendicant Saṅgha. And if there's any spiritual path of
which it may be rightly said that it's endowed with all good qualities,
complete in all good qualities, neither too little nor too much, well
explained, whole, full, and well propounded, it's of this spiritual path
that this should be said.

Uddaka son of Rāma used to
say:[1821](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1821){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1821
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Seeing, one does not see.' But seeing what
does one not see? You can see the blade of a well-sharpened razor, but
not the
edge.[1822](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1822){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1822
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thus it is said: 'Seeing, one does not
see.'[1823](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1823){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1823
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But that saying of Uddaka's is low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless, as it's only about a razor. If there's
anything of which it may be rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see,'
it's of this that it should be said. Seeing what does one not see? One
sees this: a spiritual path endowed with all good qualities, complete in
all good qualities, neither too little nor too much, well explained,
whole, full, and well propounded. One does not see this: anything that,
were it to be removed, would make it purer. One does not see this:
anything that, were it to be added, would make it more complete. Thus it
is rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see.'

### 6. Teachings Should be Recited in Concert {.subheading}

So, Cunda, you should all come together and recite in concert, without
disputing, those things I have taught you from my direct knowledge,
comparing meaning with meaning and phrasing with phrasing, so that this
spiritual path may last for a long time. That would be for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans.[1824](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1824){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1824
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what are those things I have taught
from my direct knowledge? They are the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold
path.[1825](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1825){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1825
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the things I have taught from my
own direct knowledge.

### 7. Reaching Agreement {.subheading}

Suppose one of those spiritual companions who is training in harmony and
mutual appreciation, without disputing, were to recite the teaching in
the Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable misconstrues the
meaning and mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss them, but
say,[1826](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1826){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1826
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend, if this is the meaning, the
phrasing may either be this or that: which is more fitting? And if this
is the phrasing, the meaning may be either this or that: which is more
fitting?'[1827](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1827){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1827
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose they reply, 'This phrasing fits the
meaning better than that. And this meaning fits the phrasing better than
that.' Without flattering or rebuking them, you should carefully
convince them by examining that meaning and that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable misconstrues the meaning
but gets the phrasing right.' You should neither approve nor dismiss
them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the phrasing, the meaning may be
either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose they reply, 'This
meaning fits the phrasing better than that.' Without flattering or
rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining that meaning.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the meaning
correctly but mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the meaning, the phrasing
may be either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose they reply,
'This phrasing fits the meaning better than that.' Without flattering or
rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the meaning
correctly and gets the phrasing right.' Saying 'Good!' you should
express approval and appreciation of that mendicant's statement, and
then say to them, 'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see
a venerable such as yourself, so well-versed in the meaning and the
phrasing, as one of our spiritual companions!'

### 8. The Reasons for Allowing Requisites {.subheading}

Cunda, I do not teach you solely for restraining defilements that affect
the present life. Nor do I teach solely for protecting against
defilements that affect lives to come. I teach both for restraining
defilements that affect the present life and protecting against
defilements that affect lives to come.

And that's why I have allowed robes for you that
suffice[1828](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1828){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1828
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} only for the sake of warding off cold and
heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; and for covering up the private parts. I have allowed almsfood
for you that suffices only to sustain this body, avoid harm, and support
spiritual practice; so that you will put an end to old discomfort and
not give rise to new discomfort, and will keep on living blamelessly and
at ease. I have allowed lodgings for you that suffice only for the sake
of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and
to enjoy retreat. I have allowed medicines and supplies for the sick for
you that suffice only for the sake of warding off the pains of illness
and to promote good health.

### 9. Indulgence in Pleasure {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in
pleasure.'[1829](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1829){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1829
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should say to them, 'What is that
indulgence in pleasure? For there are many different kinds of indulgence
in pleasure.'

These four kinds of indulgence in pleasure, Cunda, are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
What four?

It's when some fool makes themselves happy and pleased by killing living
creatures. This is the first kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by theft. This
is the second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by lying. This
is the third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone amuses themselves, supplied and provided with the
five kinds of sensual stimulation. This is the fourth kind of indulgence
in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure that are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Not so!' It isn't right to say that about you; it
misrepresents you with an untruth.

Cunda, these four kinds of indulgence in pleasure lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.[1830](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1830){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1830
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is the first kind of indulgence in
pleasure.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is the
second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is the
third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This
is the fourth kind of indulgence in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure which lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Exactly so!' It's right to say that about you; it
doesn't misrepresent you with an untruth.

### 10. The Benefits of Indulgence in Pleasure {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'How many
fruits and benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four ways?' You should say to them, 'Four benefits may
be expected by those who live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.
What four?

Firstly, with the ending of three fetters a mendicant becomes a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening. This is the first fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant---with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---becomes a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. This
is the second fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, with the ending of the five lower fetters, a mendicant is
reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world. This is the third fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the fourth
fruit and benefit.

These four benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four
ways.'[1831](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1831){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1831
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 11. Things Impossible for the Perfected {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan are
fickle.'[1832](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1832){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1832
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should say to them, 'Reverends, these
things have been taught and pointed out for his disciples by the Blessed
One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha,
not to be transgressed so long as life lasts. Suppose there was a
boundary pillar or an iron pillar with deep foundations, firmly
embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. In the same way, these things
have been taught and pointed out for his disciples by the Blessed One,
who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, not to
be transgressed so long as life lasts.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress
in nine
respects.[1833](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1833){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1833
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay person. And they
can't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or
cowardice. A mendicant who is perfected can't transgress in these nine
respects.'

### 12. Questions and Answers {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetic
Gotama demonstrates boundless knowledge and vision of the past, but not
of the future. What's up with that?' Those wanderers, like incompetent
fools, seem to imagine that one kind of knowledge and vision can be
demonstrated by means of another kind of knowledge and
vision.[1834](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1834){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1834
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Regarding the past, the Realized One has knowledge stemming from memory.
He recollects as far as he wants.

Regarding the future, the Realized One has the knowledge born of
awakening:[1835](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1835){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1835
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is my last rebirth; now there'll be
no more future lives.'

If a question about the past is untrue, false, and pointless, the
Realized One does not reply. If a question about the past is true and
correct, but pointless, he does not reply. If a question about the past
is true, correct, and beneficial, he knows the right time to reply. And
the Realized One replies to questions about the future or the present in
the same way.

And so the Realized One has speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful,
in line with the teaching and training. That's why he's called the
'Realized
One'.[1836](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1836){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1836
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---whatever is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind, all
that has been understood by the Realized One. That's why he's called the
'Realized One'.

From the night when the Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished---in the element
of extinguishment with no residue---everything he speaks, says, and
expresses is real, not otherwise. That's why he's called the 'Realized
One'.

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. Since this is so,
that's why he's called the 'Realized One'. In this world---with its
gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and
brahmins, gods and humans---the Realized One is the vanquisher, the
unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power.

### 13. The Undeclared Points {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'Is this your
view: "A Realized One exists after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is
futile"?'[1837](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1837){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1837
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should say to them, 'Reverend, this has
not been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been declared by the
Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One both
exists and doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything
else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been
declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not
been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this not been declared by the
ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's not beneficial or
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. That's why it hasn't been declared by the Buddha.'

### 14. The Declared Points {.subheading}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'But what has
been declared by the ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'What has
been declared by the Buddha is this: "This is suffering"---"This is the
origin of suffering"---"This is the cessation of suffering"---"This is
the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering."'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this been declared by the ascetic
Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's beneficial and relevant
to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
That's why it has been declared by the Buddha.'

### 15. Views of the Past {.subheading}

Cunda, I have explained to you as they should be explained the views
that some rely on regarding the
past.[1838](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1838){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1838
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Shall I explain them to you in the wrong
way? I have explained to you as they should be explained the views that
some rely on regarding the future. Shall I explain them to you in the
wrong way?

What are the views that some rely on regarding the past? There are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self and the
cosmos are eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'The self and the cosmos are not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. The self and the cosmos are
made by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and
another, or they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another.
Pleasure and pain are eternal, or not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. Pleasure and pain are made
by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and another, or
they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that
the self and the cosmos are eternal, and say, 'Reverends, is this what
you say, "The self and the cosmos are eternal"?' But when they say,
'Yes! This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I don't
acknowledge that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have
different opinions on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that
are equal to my own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is
superior when it comes to the higher exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the past.

### 16. Views of the Future {.subheading}

What are the views that some rely on regarding the future? There are
some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self is
free of disease after death, and formed ... or formless ... or both
formed and formless ... or neither formed nor formless ... or percipient
... or non-percipient ... or neither percipient nor non-percipient ...
or the self is annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks up, and
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that,
'The self is formed and free of disease after death,' and say,
'Reverends, is this what you say, "The self is formed and free of
disease after death"?' But when they say, 'Yes! This is the only truth,
anything else is futile,' I don't acknowledge that. Why is that? Because
there are beings who have different opinions on this topic. I don't see
any such expositions that are equal to my own, still less superior.
Rather, I am the one who is superior when it comes to the higher
exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the future, which I have
explained to you as they should be explained. Shall I explain them to
you in the wrong way?

I have taught and pointed out the four kinds of mindfulness meditation
for giving up and going beyond all these views of the past and the
future.[1839](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1839){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1839
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? It's when a mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. These are the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation that I have taught for giving up and
going beyond all these views of the past and the future."

Now at that time Venerable Upavāna was standing behind the Buddha
fanning him. He said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing!
This exposition of the teaching is impressive, sir, it is very
impressive. Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"Well then, Upavāna, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as
'The Impressive Discourse'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Upavāna approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn30">

## [DN 30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Marks of a Great Man ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lakkhaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"There are thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses
these has only two possible destinies, no
other.[1840](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1840){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1840
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven treasures. He has the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder,
and the commander as the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons
who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After
conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or
sword. But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he
becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the
veil from the world.

And what are the thirty-two
marks?[1841](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1841){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1841
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has well-planted feet.

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and
hubs, complete in every detail.

He has stretched heels.

He has long fingers.

His hands and feet are tender.

He has serried hands and feet.

The tops of his feet are arched.

His calves are like those of an antelope.

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands
touch the knees.

His private parts are covered in a foreskin.

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous gold.

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.

His hairs grow one per pore.

His hairs stand up; they're blue-black and curl clockwise.

His body is tall and straight-limbed.

He has bulging muscles in seven places.

His chest is like that of a lion.

He is filled out between the shoulders.

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his
arms equals the height of his body.

His torso is cylindrical.

He has ridged taste buds.

His jaw is like that of a lion.

He has forty teeth.

His teeth are even.

His teeth have no gaps.

His teeth are perfectly white.

He has a large tongue.

He has the voice of the Divinity, like a cuckoo's call.

His eyes are indigo.

He has eyelashes like a cow's.

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like
cotton-wool.

The crown of his head is like a turban.

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses
these has only two possible destinies, no other.

Seers who are outsiders remember these marks, but they do not know the
specific deeds performed in the past to obtain each
mark.[1842](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1842){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1842
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. Well-Planted Feet {.subheading}

In some past lives, past existences, past abodes the Realized One was
reborn as a human being. He firmly and persistently undertook skillful
behaviors such as good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, giving
and sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect
to mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the
family, and various other things pertaining to skillful
behaviors.[1843](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1843){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1843
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Due to performing, accumulating, heaping
up, and amassing those deeds, when his body broke up, after death, he
was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. There he surpassed the
other gods in ten respects: heavenly life span, beauty, happiness,
glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. When he
passed away from there and came back to this place he obtained this mark
of a great man: he has well-planted feet. He places his foot on the
ground evenly, raises it evenly, and touches the ground evenly with the
whole sole of his foot.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. He has the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant,
the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as
the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land
girt by sea---free of harassment by bandits, successful and prosperous,
safe, blessed, and untroubled---he reigns by principle, without rod or
sword. And what does he obtain as king? He can't be stopped by any human
foe or enemy. That's what he obtains as king. But if he goes forth from
the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. And what does
he obtain as Buddha? He can't be stopped by any foe or enemy whether
internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Truth, principle, self-control, and
> restraint;[1844](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1844){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1844
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> purity, precepts, and observing the sabbath;\
> giving, harmlessness, delighting in non-violence---\
> firmly undertaking these things, he lived accordingly.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> he steps evenly on this rich earth.
>
> The gathered soothsayers predicted\
> that there is no stopping one of such even tread,\
> as householder or renunciate.\
> That's the meaning shown by this mark.
>
> While living at home he cannot be stopped,\
> he defeats his foes, and cannot be beaten.\
> Due to the fruit of that deed,\
> he cannot be stopped by any human.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> not even the best can ever stop
> him;[1845](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1845){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1845
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> this is the nature of the supreme person."

### 2. Wheels on the Feet {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He conveyed happiness to many people, eliminating threats,
terror, and danger, providing just protection and security, and giving
gifts with all the
trimmings.[1846](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1846){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1846
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Due to performing those deeds he was reborn
in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this
mark: on the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with
rims and hubs, complete in every detail and well divided inside.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a large following of
brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. But if
he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a fully
awakened Buddha. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He has a large
following of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans,
dragons, and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha
spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> he brought happiness to many people,\
> ridding them of fear, terror, and danger,\
> eagerly guarding and protecting them.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> wheels on his two feet are found,
>
> all rimmed around and thousand-spoked.\
> The gathered soothsayers predicted,\
> seeing the prince `<j>`{=html}with the hundred-fold mark of
> merits,[1847](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1847){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1847
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> that he'd have a following, subduing foes,
>
> which is why he has wheels all rimmed around.\
> If he doesn't choose the life gone forth,\
> he'll roll the wheel and rule the land.\
> The aristocrats will be his vassals,
>
> flocking to his glory.\
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> the gods, humans, titans, Sakka, and monsters;
>
> centaurs and dragons, birds and beasts,\
> will flock to his glory,\
> the supreme, honored by gods and humans."

### 3--5. Stretched Heels, Etc. {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He gave up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the
sword. He was scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all
living beings. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these three marks: he
has stretched heels, long fingers, and his body is tall and
straight-limbed.[1848](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1848){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1848
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He's long-lived, preserving
his life for a long time. No human foe or enemy is able to take his life
before his time. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain
as Buddha? He's long-lived, preserving his life for a long time. No foes
or enemies---nor any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or
anyone in the world---is able to take his life before his time. That's
what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Realizing for himself the horrors of death,\
> he refrained from killing other creatures.\
> By that good conduct he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done.
>
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> he obtained these three marks:\
> his stretched heels are abundant and long,\
> and like the Divinity, he's straight and beautiful, `<j>`{=html}with
> well-formed
> limbs.[1849](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1849){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1849
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}
>
> Fair of arm, youthful, of good posture and breeding,\
> his fingers are soft and tender and long.\
> By these three marks of an excellent man,\
> they indicated that the prince's life would be long:
>
> 'As a householder he will live
> long;[1850](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1850){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1850
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> longer still if he goes forth, due to\
> mastery in the development of psychic power.\
> Thus this is the sign of long life.'"

### 6. Seven Bulging Places {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was a donor of delicious and tasty cooked and fresh foods, and
drinks that were sweet and
succulent.[1851](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1851){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1851
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Due to performing those deeds he was reborn
in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this
mark: he has bulging muscles in seven places. Both hands, both feet,
both shoulders, and his chest are all bulging.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He gets delicious and tasty
cooked and fresh foods, and drinks that are sweet and succulent. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He gets
delicious and tasty cooked and fresh foods, and drinks that are sweet
and succulent. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He used to give the very best of flavors---\
> scrumptious foods of every kind.\
> Because of that good deed,\
> he rejoiced long in Nandana heaven.
>
> On returning to here, he is rounded in seven places,\
> and tender hands and feet are found.\
> The soothsayers expert in signs declared:\
> 'He'll get tasty foods of all sorts
>
> as a householder, that's what that means.\
> But even if he goes forth he'll get the same,\
> supreme in gaining tasty foods of all sorts,\
> cutting all bonds of the lay life.'"

### 7--8. Tender and Serried Hands {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He brought people together using the four ways of being
inclusive: giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: his hands and feet are
tender, and they are
serried.[1852](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1852){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1852
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? His retinue is inclusive,
cohesive, and well-managed. This includes brahmins and householders,
people of town and country, finance ministers, military officers,
guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and
princes.[1853](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1853){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1853
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? His retinue is inclusive and well-managed.
This includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans,
dragons, and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha
spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "By giving and helping others,\
> kindly speech, and equal treatment,\
> such action and conduct as brought people together,\
> he went to heaven due to his esteemed virtue.
>
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> the young baby prince obtained\
> hands and feet so tender and serried,\
> lovely, graceful, and good-looking.
>
> His retinue is loyal and manageable,\
> staying agreeably all over this broad
> land.[1854](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1854){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1854
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Speaking kindly, seeking happiness,\
> he implements agreeable qualities.
>
> But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments,\
> as victor he speaks Dhamma to the people.\
> Devoted, they respond to his words;\
> after listening, they practice in line with the teaching."

### 9--10. Arched Feet and Upright Hair {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. His speech was meaningful and principled. He educated many
people, bringing welfare and happiness, offering the teaching. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: the tops of his feet are
arched and his hairs stand
up.[1855](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1855){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1855
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of those who enjoy sensual pleasures. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of all sentient beings.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "His word was meaningful and principled,\
> moving the people with his explanations.\
> He brought welfare and happiness to creatures,\
> unstintingly offering up teaching.
>
> Because of that good deed,\
> he advanced to heaven and there rejoiced.\
> On return to here two marks are found,\
> of excellence and supremacy.
>
> His hairs stand upright,\
> and his ankles stand out well.\
> Swollen with flesh and blood, encased in skin,\
> beautified above the feet.
>
> If such a one lives in the home, he becomes\
> the best of those who enjoy sensual pleasures.\
> There'll be none better than him;\
> he'll proceed having mastered all the Black Plum Tree Land.
>
> But going forth the peerless renunciate\
> turns into the best of all creatures.\
> There'll be none better than him,\
> he'll live having mastered the whole world."

### 11. Antelope Calves {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was a thorough teacher of a profession, a branch of knowledge,
conduct, or action, thinking: 'How might they quickly learn and
practice, without getting exhausted?' Due to performing those deeds he
was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he
obtained this mark: his calves are like those of an
antelope.[1856](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1856){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1856
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He quickly obtains the things
worthy of a king, the factors, supports, and things befitting a king.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He
quickly obtains the things worthy of an ascetic, the factors, supports,
and things befitting an ascetic. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The
Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In professions, knowledge, conduct, and deeds,\
> he thought of how they might easily learn.\
> Quickly, without tiresome delays,\
> he taught them things that harm no-one at all.
>
> Having done that skillful deed `<j>`{=html}whose outcome is happiness,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> he gains prominent and elegant calves.\
> Well-formed in graceful spirals,\
> he's covered in fine rising hairs.
>
> They say that person has antelope calves,\
> and that this is the mark of swift success.\
> If he desires the things fitting the household life,\
> not going forth, they'll quickly be his.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> the peerless renunciate will quickly find\
> what is fitting and
> suitable."[1857](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1857){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1857
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 12. Delicate Skin {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He approached an ascetic or brahmin and asked: 'Sirs, what is
skillful? What is unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless?
What should be cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what
leads to my lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting
welfare and happiness?' Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a
heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark:
he has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.[1858](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1858){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1858
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has great wisdom. Of those
who enjoy sensual pleasures, none is his equal or better in wisdom.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He
has great wisdom, widespread wisdom, laughing wisdom, swift wisdom,
sharp wisdom, and penetrating wisdom. No sentient being is his equal or
better in wisdom. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke
this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> eager to understand, he asked questions.\
> Keen to learn, he waited on renunciates,\
> heeding their explanation with pure intent.
>
> Due to that deed of acquiring wisdom,\
> as a human being his skin is delicate.\
> At his birth `<j>`{=html}the soothsayers expert in signs prophesied:
> `</j>`{=html}\
> 'He'll discern delicate matters.'
>
> If he doesn't choose the life gone forth,\
> he'll roll the wheel and rule the land.\
> Among those with material things who have been educated,\
> none equal or better than him is found.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> gaining wisdom that's supreme and eminent,\
> the one of superb, vast intelligence `<j>`{=html}attains awakening."
> `</j>`{=html}

### 13. Golden Skin {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He wasn't irritable or bad-tempered. Even when heavily criticized
he didn't lose his temper, become annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or
display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He donated soft and fine mats
and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained this mark: he is golden colored; his skin
shines like lustrous
gold.[1859](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1859){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1859
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He obtains soft and fine mats
and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He obtains
soft and fine mats and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk,
and wool. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "Fixated on good will, he gave
> gifts.[1860](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1860){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1860
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> In an earlier life he poured forth cloth\
> fine and soft to touch,\
> like a god pouring rain on this broad
> earth.[1861](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1861){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1861
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> So doing he passed from here to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruits of deeds well done.\
> Here he wins a figure shining like honey-yellow
> gold,[1862](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1862){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1862
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> like Indra, the finest of gods.
>
> If that man stays in the house, not wishing to go forth,\
> he conquers and rules this vast, broad earth.\
> He obtains abundant excellent cloth,\
> so fine and soft to touch.
>
> He receives robes, cloth, and the finest
> garments[1863](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1863){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1863
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> if he chooses the life gone forth.\
> For he still partakes of past deed's fruit;\
> what's been done is never lost."

### 14. Privates in Foreskin {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He reunited long-lost and long-separated relatives, friends,
loved ones, and companions. He reunited mother with child and child with
mother; father with child and child with father; brother with brother,
brother with sister, sister with brother, and sister with sister,
bringing them together with rejoicing. Due to performing those deeds he
was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he
obtained this mark: his private parts are covered in a
foreskin.[1864](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1864){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1864
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has many sons, over a
thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his
enemies. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as
Buddha? He has many sons, many thousands of sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. That's what he obtains as
Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> he reunited long-lost\
> and long-separated friends and family,\
> bringing them together with joy.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> his private parts are covered in a foreskin.
>
> Such a one has many sons,\
> over a thousand descendants,\
> valiant and heroic, devastating foes,\
> a layman's joy, speaking kindly.
>
> But if he lives the renunciate life\
> he has even more sons following his word.\
> As householder or renunciate,\
> that's the meaning shown by this mark."

The first recitation section is finished.

### 15--16. Equal Proportions and Touching the Knees {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. Examining the gathered population, he knew what they had in
common and what was their own; he knew each person, and he knew the
distinctions between people. In each case, he made appropriate
distinctions between people: 'This one deserves that; that one deserves
this.' Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm.
When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: he has the
proportional circumference of a banyan tree; and when standing upright
and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the
knees.[1865](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1865){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1865
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is rich, affluent, and
wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, lots
of money and grain, and a full treasury and storehouses. That's what he
obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He is rich,
affluent, and wealthy. He has these kinds of wealth: the wealth of
faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Examining the many people in a community,\
> he weighed, evaluated, and judged each case:\
> 'This one deserves that.'\
> That's how he used to draw `<j>`{=html}distinctions between people.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Now standing without bending\
> he can touch his knees with both hands.\
> With the remaining ripening `<j>`{=html}of the fruit of good deeds,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> his circumference was that of a great tree.
>
> Learned experts in the many different\
> signs and marks prophesied:\
> 'The young prince will obtain\
> many different things that householders deserve.
>
> Here there are many suitable pleasures\
> for the ruler of the land to enjoy as householder.\
> But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments,\
> he will gain the supreme, highest peak of wealth.'"

### 17--19. A Lion's Chest, Etc. {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He desired the good, the welfare, the comfort, and sanctuary of
the people, thinking: 'How might they flourish in faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, teachings, and wisdom; in wealth and grain, fields
and land, birds and beasts, children and partners; in bondservants,
workers, and staff; in family, friends, and kin?' Due to performing
those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this
place he obtained these three marks: his chest is like that of a lion;
he is filled out between the shoulders.; and his torso is
cylindrical.[1866](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1866){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1866
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He's not liable to decline. He
doesn't decline in wealth and grain, fields and land, birds and beasts,
children and partners; in bondservants, workers, and staff; in family,
friends, and kin. He doesn't decline in any of his accomplishments.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He's
not liable to decline. He doesn't decline in faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. He doesn't decline in any of his
accomplishments.[1867](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1867){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1867
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what he obtains as Buddha." The
Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "His wish was this: 'How may others not decline\
> in faith, ethics, learning, and intelligence,\
> in generosity, teachings, and much good else,\
> in coin and grain, fields and lands,
>
> in children, partners, and livestock,\
> in family, friends, and kin,\
> in health, and both beauty and happiness?'\
> And so he ever desired their success.
>
> His chest was prominent like that of a lion,\
> filled out between the shoulders, `<j>`{=html}and torso cylindrical.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> Due to the well-done deeds of the past,\
> he had that portent of non-decline.
>
> Even as layman he grows in coin and grain,\
> in wives, children, and livestock.\
> But once gone forth, owning nothing, he attains\
> the supreme awakening which may never decline."

### 20. Ridged Taste Buds {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He would never hurt any sentient being with fists, stones, rods,
or swords. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark: he has
ridged taste buds. His raised taste receptors, originating in the
throat, disperse evenly.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is rarely ill or unwell.
His stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold.[1868](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1868){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1868
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? He is rarely ill or unwell. His stomach
digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and
fit for meditation. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke
this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Not with fist or rod or stone,\
> or sword or beating to death,\
> or by bondage or threats\
> did he ever harm anyone.
>
> For that very reason he rejoiced in heaven `<j>`{=html}after passing
> away, `</j>`{=html}\
> finding happiness as a fruit of happy deeds.\
> With taste receptors prominent `<j>`{=html}and evenly spreading
> nutrition, `</j>`{=html}\
> on his return here he has ridged taste buds.
>
> That's why the clever prophets said:\
> 'This man will have much happiness\
> as householder or renunciate.\
> That's the meaning shown by this mark.'"

### 21--22. Indigo Eyes {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. When looking at others he didn't glare, look askance, or avert
his eyes. Being straightforward, he reached out to others with
straightforward intentions, looking at people with kindly eyes. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: his eyes are indigo, and
he has eyelashes like a
cow's.[1869](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1869){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1869
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? The people look on him with
kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders,
people of town and country, finance ministers, military officers,
guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and
princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as
Buddha? The people look on him with kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved
to the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "With not a glare or glance askance,\
> nor averting of the eyes;\
> straightforward, he reached out straightforwardly,\
> looking at people with kindly eyes.
>
> In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit\
> and result, rejoicing there.\
> But here he has a cow's eyelashes,\
> and indigo eyes so fair to see.
>
> Many soothsayers, men
> clever[1870](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1870){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1870
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and learned in prognostic texts,\
> expert in cow-like lashes, indicated he'd\
> be looked upon with kindly eyes.
>
> Even as a householder he'd be regarded kindly,\
> beloved of the people.\
> But if he becomes an ascetic, not lay,\
> as destroyer of sorrow he'll be loved by many."

### 23. Crown Like a Turban {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was the leader and forerunner of people in skillful behaviors
such as good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, giving and
sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect to
mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the
family, and various other things pertaining to skillful
behaviors.[1871](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1871){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1871
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Due to performing those deeds he was reborn
in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this
mark: the crown of his head is like a turban.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a large following of
brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? He has a large following of monks, nuns,
laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs. That's
what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Among people of good conduct, he was the leader,\
> devoted to a life of principle among the principled.\
> The people followed him,\
> and he experienced the fruit of good deeds in heaven.
>
> Having experienced that fruit,\
> he gains a head crowned like a turban.\
> The experts in omens and signs prophesied:\
> 'He will be leader of the people.
>
> Among people then, as before,\
> they will bring presents for him.\
> If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land,\
> he'll gain the service of the people.
>
> But if that man goes forth,\
> he'll be sophisticated, proficient in the teachings.\
> Devoted to the virtues of his instruction,\
> the people will become his followers.'"

### 24--25. One Hair Per Pore, and a Tuft {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from lying. He spoke the truth and stuck to the
truth. He was honest and dependable, and didn't trick the world with his
words. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm.
When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: his hairs
grow one per pore, and between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and
white like
cotton-wool.[1872](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1872){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1872
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has many close adherents
among the brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? He has many close adherents among the monks,
nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In past lives he was true to his promise,\
> with no forked tongue, he shunned lies.\
> He never broke his word to anyone,\
> but spoke what was true, real, and factual.
>
> A tuft so very white like cotton-wool\
> grew prettily between his eyebrows.\
> And never two, but only one,\
> hair grew in each of his pores.
>
> Many soothsayers learned in marks\
> and expert in signs gathered and prophesied:\
> 'One like this, with tuft and hair so prominent,\
> will have many as his close adherents.
>
> Even as householder many people will follow him,\
> due to the power of deeds in the past.\
> But once gone forth, owning nothing,\
> as Buddha the people will follow him.'"

### 26--27. Forty Gapless Teeth {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from divisive speech. He didn't repeat in one place
what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other.
Instead, he reconciled those who were divided, supporting unity,
delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: he
has forty teeth, and his teeth have no
gaps.[1873](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1873){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1873
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? His retinue cannot be divided.
This includes brahmins and householders, people of town and country,
finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors,
rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king.
And what does he obtain as Buddha? His retinue cannot be divided. This
includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons,
and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He spoke no words divisive causing friends to split,\
> creating disputes that foster division,\
> acting improperly by fostering quarrels,\
> creating division among friends.
>
> He spoke kind words to foster harmony,\
> uniting those who are divided.\
> He eliminated quarrels among the people,\
> rejoicing together with the united.
>
> In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit\
> and result, rejoicing there.\
> Here his teeth are gapless, close together,\
> forty standing prominent in his mouth.
>
> If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land,\
> his assembly will be indivisible.\
> And as an ascetic, stainless, immaculate,\
> his assembly will follow him, unshakable."

### 28--29. A Large Tongue and the Voice of the Divinity {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from harsh speech. He spoke in a way that's mellow,
pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and
agreeable to the people. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in
a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these two
marks: he has a large tongue, and the voice of the Divinity, like a
cuckoo's call.

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a persuasive voice. His
words are persuasive to brahmins and householders, people of town and
country, finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers,
councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he
obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He has a persuasive
voice. His words are persuasive to monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods,
humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs. That's what he obtains as
Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "He never spoke a loud harsh word,\
> insulting, quarrelsome,\
> causing harm, rude, crushing the people.\
> His speech was sweet, helpful, and courteous.
>
> He uttered words dear to the mind,\
> going to the heart, pleasing to the ear.\
> He enjoyed the fruit of his good verbal conduct,\
> experiencing the fruit of good deeds in heaven.
>
> Having experienced that fruit,\
> on his return to here he acquired the voice of the Divinity.\
> His tongue was long and wide,\
> and his speech was persuasive.
>
> Even as householder his speech brings prosperity.\
> But if that man goes forth,\
> speaking often to the people,\
> they'll be persuaded by his fair words."

### 30. A Lion-Like Jaw {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from talking nonsense. His words were timely, true,
and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He said things
at the right time which were valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark: his jaw is
like that of a
lion.[1874](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1874){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1874
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He can't be destroyed by any
human foe or enemy. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he
obtain as Buddha? He can't be destroyed by any foe or enemy whether
internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Neither nonsensical nor silly,\
> his way of speaking was never loose.\
> He eliminated what was unbeneficial,\
> and spoke for the welfare `<j>`{=html}and happiness of the people.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> So doing he passed from here to be reborn in heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done.\
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> he gained a jaw like the finest of beasts.
>
> He became a king so very hard to defeat,\
> a mighty lord and ruler of men.\
> He was equal to the best `<j>`{=html}in the city of the Three and
> Thirty, `</j>`{=html}\
> like Indra, the finest of gods.
>
> One such as that is not easily beaten by centaurs,\
> titans, spirits, monsters, or gods.\
> If he becomes of such a kind,\
> he illuminates the quarters and in-between."

### 31--32. Even and White Teeth {.subheading}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He gave up wrong livelihood and earned a living by right
livelihood. He refrained from falsifying weights, metals, or measures;
bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction,
banditry, plunder, and violence. Due to performing, accumulating,
heaping up, and amassing those deeds, when his body broke up, after
death, he was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. There he
surpassed the other gods in ten respects: heavenly life span, beauty,
happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches. When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks:
his teeth are even and perfectly
white.[1875](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1875){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1875
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven treasures. He has the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder,
and the commander as the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons
who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After
conquering this land girt by sea---free of harassment by bandits,
successful and prosperous, safe, blessed, and untroubled---he reigns by
principle, without rod or
sword.[1876](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1876){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1876
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what does he obtain as king? His
retinue is pure. This includes brahmins and householders, people of town
and country, finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers,
councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he
obtains as king.

But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the
world. And what does he obtain as Buddha? His retinue is pure. This
includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons,
and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He abandoned wrong livelihood, and created\
> a way of life that's fair, pure, and just.\
> He eliminated what was unbeneficial,\
> and lived for the welfare and happiness of the people.
>
> Having done what's praised `<j>`{=html}by the clever, the wise, and
> the good, `</j>`{=html}\
> that man experienced the fruit in heaven.\
> Equal to the best in the heaven of Three and Thirty,\
> he enjoyed himself with pleasure and play.
>
> From there he passed back to a human life.\
> With the remaining ripening `<j>`{=html}of the fruit of good deeds,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> he obtained teeth that are even,\
> gleaming, bright, and white.
>
> Many soothsayers regarded as wise men\
> gathered and predicted of him:\
> 'With twice-born teeth `<j>`{=html}so even, so white, so clean and
> bright `</j>`{=html}\
> his retinue will be so pure.
>
> As king, his people will also be pure,\
> when he rules having conquered this earth so broad.\
> They won't harm the country,\
> but will live for the welfare `<j>`{=html}and happiness of the people.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> But if he goes forth he'll be an ascetic free of ill,\
> his passions quelled, the veil drawn back.\
> Rid of stress and weariness,\
> he sees this world and the next.
>
> Those who do his bidding, both lay and renunciate,\
> shake off wickedness, impure and blameworthy.\
> He's surrounded by pure people, who dispel\
> stains, callousness, sin, and corruptions.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn31">

## [DN 31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice to Sigālaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Siṅgālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at
that time the householder's son Sigālaka rose early and left Rājagaha.
With his clothes and hair all wet, he raised his joined palms to revere
the various
quarters---[1877](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1877){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1877
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} east, south, west, north, below, and
above.[1878](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1878){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1878
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Rājagaha for alms. He saw Sigālaka revering the quarters and
said to him, "Householder's son, why are you revering the quarters in
this way?"

"Sir, on his deathbed my father said to me: 'My dear, please revere the
quarters.'[1879](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1879){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1879
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Honoring, respecting, and venerating my
father's words, I rose early and left Rājagaha and, with my clothes and
hair all wet, raised my joined palms to revere the various
quarters---east, south, west, north, below, and above."

### 1. The Six Directions {.subheading}

"Householder's son, that's not how the six directions should be revered
in the training of the Noble
One."[1880](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1880){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1880
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how should the six directions be revered in the training of
the Noble One? Sir, please teach me this."

"Well then, householder's son, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Sigālaka. The Buddha said this:

"Householder's son, a noble disciple gives up four corrupt deeds,
doesn't do bad deeds on four grounds, and avoids six drains on wealth.
When they've left these fourteen bad things behind they have the six
directions
covered.[1881](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1881){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1881
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're practicing to win in both worlds,
and they succeed in this world and the next. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

### 2. Four Corrupt Deeds {.subheading}

What four corrupt deeds have they given
up?[1882](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1882){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1882
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual
misconduct, and lying: these are corrupt deeds. These are the four
corrupt deeds they've given up."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Killing, stealing,\
> telling lies,\
> and committing adultery:\
> astute people don't praise these things."

### 3. Four Grounds {.subheading}

"On what four grounds do they not do bad
deeds?[1883](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1883){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1883
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} One does bad deeds prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. When a noble disciple
is not prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice,
they don't do bad deeds on these four grounds."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "If you act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity,\
> your fame shrinks,\
> like the moon in the waning fortnight.
>
> If you don't act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity,\
> your fame swells,\
> like the moon in the waxing fortnight."

### 4. Six Drains on Wealth {.subheading}

"What six drains on wealth do they
avoid?[1884](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1884){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1884
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Habitually engaging in the following things
is a drain on wealth: consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants;
roaming the streets at night; frequenting festivals; gambling; bad
friends;
laziness.[1885](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1885){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1885
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 5. Six Drawbacks of Drinking {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of habitually consuming beer, wine, and
liquor that cause
intoxication.[1886](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1886){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1886
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Immediate loss of wealth, promotion of
quarrels, susceptibility to illness, disrepute, indecent exposure; and
weakened wisdom is the sixth thing. These are the six drawbacks of
habitually consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.

### 6. Six Drawbacks of Roaming the Streets at Night {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of roaming the streets at night. Yourself,
your partners and children, and your property are all left unguarded.
You're suspected of bad deeds. Untrue rumors spread about you. You're at
the forefront of many things that entail suffering. These are the six
drawbacks of roaming the streets at night.

### 7. Six Drawbacks of Festivals {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of frequenting festivals. You're always
thinking: 'Where's the dancing? Where's the singing? Where's the music?
Where are the stories? Where's the applause? Where are the kettledrums?'
These are the six drawbacks of frequenting festivals.

### 8. Six Drawbacks of Gambling {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of habitually gambling. Victory breeds
enmity. The loser mourns their money. There is immediate loss of wealth.
A gambler's word carries no weight in public assembly. Friends and
colleagues treat them with contempt. And no-one wants to marry a
gambler, for they think: 'This individual is a gambler---they're not
able to support a partner.' These are the six drawbacks of habitually
gambling.

### 9. Six Drawbacks of Bad Friends {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of bad friends. You become friends and
companions with those who are addicts, carousers, drunkards, frauds,
swindlers, and thugs. These are the six drawbacks of bad friends.

### 10. Six Drawbacks of Laziness {.subheading}

There are these six drawbacks of habitual laziness. You don't get your
work done because you think: 'It's too cold! It's too hot. It's too
late! It's too early! I'm too hungry! I'm too full!' By dwelling on so
many excuses for not working, you don't make any more money, and the
money you already have runs out. These are the six drawbacks of habitual
laziness."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Some are just drinking buddies,\
> some call you their dear, dear friend,\
> but a true friend is one\
> who stands by you in need.
>
> Sleeping late, adultery,\
> making enemies, harmfulness,\
> bad friends, and avarice:\
> these six grounds ruin a person.
>
> With bad friends, bad companions,\
> bad behavior and alms-resort,\
> a man falls to ruin\
> in both this world and the next.
>
> Dice, women, toddy, song and
> dance;[1887](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1887){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1887
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> sleeping by day and roaming at night;\
> bad friends, and avarice:\
> these six grounds ruin a person.
>
> They play dice and drink beer,\
> and consort with women loved by others.\
> Associating with the worse, not the better,\
> they diminish like the waning moon.
>
> One who is broke and destitute due to
> toddy,[1888](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1888){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1888
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> thirsty, drinking in the bar,\
> drowning in debt,\
> will quickly lose their
> way.[1889](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1889){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1889
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> When you're in the habit of sleeping late,\
> seeing night as time to rise,\
> and always getting drunk,\
> you can't keep up the household life.
>
> 'Too cold, too hot,\
> too late,' they say.\
> When the young neglect their work like this,\
> riches pass them
> by.[1890](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1890){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1890
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> But one who considers heat and cold\
> as no more than blades of grass---\
> he does his duties as a man,\
> and happiness never fails."

### 11. Fake Friends {.subheading}

"Householder's son, you should recognize these four enemies disguised as
friends: the taker, the talker, the flatterer, the spender.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all take on four grounds.

> Your possessions end up theirs.\
> Giving little, they expect a lot.\
> They do their duty out of fear.\
> They associate for their own advantage.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all take on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all talk on four grounds. They're
hospitable in the past. They're hospitable in the future. They're full
of meaningless pleasantries. When something needs doing in the present
they point to their own misfortune. You can recognize a fake friend
who's all talk on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's a flatterer on four grounds. They
support you equally in doing bad and doing good. They praise you to your
face, and put you down behind your back. You can recognize a fake friend
who's a flatterer on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's a spender on four grounds. They
accompany you when drinking, roaming the streets at night, frequenting
festivals, and gambling. You can recognize a fake friend who's a spender
on these four grounds."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "One friend is all take,\
> another all talk;\
> one's just a flatterer,\
> and one's a friend who spends.
>
> An astute person understands\
> these four enemies for what they are\
> and keeps them at a distance,\
> as they'd shun a risky road."

### 12. Good-Hearted Friends {.subheading}

"Householder's son, you should recognize these four good-hearted
friends: the helper, the friend in good times and bad, the counselor,
and the one who's sympathetic.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a helper on four grounds.
They guard you when you're negligent. They guard your property when
you're negligent. They keep you safe in times of danger. When something
needs doing, they provide you with twice the money you need. You can
recognize a good-hearted friend who's a helper on these four grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's the same in good times and
bad on four grounds. They tell you secrets. They keep your secrets. They
don't abandon you in times of trouble. They'd even give their life for
your welfare. You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's the same in
good times and bad on these four grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a counselor on four
grounds. They keep you from doing bad. They support you in doing good.
They teach you what you do not know. They explain the path to heaven.
You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a counselor on these four
grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's sympathetic on four
grounds. They don't delight in your misfortune. They delight in your
good fortune. They keep others from criticizing you. They encourage
praise of you. You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's sympathetic
on these four grounds."

The Buddha spoke this matter. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "A friend who's a helper,\
> one the same in both pleasure and pain,\
> a friend of good counsel,\
> and one of sympathy;
>
> an astute person understands\
> these four friends for what they are\
> and carefully looks after them,\
> like a mother the child at her breast.\
> The astute and virtuous\
> shine like a burning flame.
>
> They pick up riches as bees\
> roaming round pick up pollen.\
> And their riches proceed to grow,\
> like a termite mound piling up.
>
> In gathering wealth like this,\
> a householder does enough for their family.\
> And they'd hold on to friends\
> by dividing their wealth in four.
>
> One portion is to enjoy.\
> Two parts invest in work.\
> And the fourth should be kept\
> for times of trouble."

### 13. Covering the Six Directions {.subheading}

"And how, householder's son, does a noble disciple cover the six
directions?[1891](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1891){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1891
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These six directions should be recognized:
parents as the east, tutors as the south, partner and children as the
west, friends and colleagues as the north, bondservants and workers as
beneath, and ascetics and brahmins as
above.[1892](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1892){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1892
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A child should serve their parents as the eastern quarter in five ways,
thinking: 'I will support those who supported me. I'll do my duty for
them. I'll maintain the family lineage. I'll take care of the
inheritance. When they have passed away, I'll make an offering on their
behalf.' Parents served by the children in these five ways show sympathy
to them in five ways. They keep them from doing bad. They support them
in doing good. They train them in a profession. They connect them with a
suitable partner. They transfer the inheritance in due time. Parents
served by their children in these five ways show sympathy to them in
these five ways. And that's how the eastern quarter is covered, kept
safe and free of peril.

A pupil should serve their tutor as the southern quarter in five ways:
by rising for them, by serving them, by listening well, by looking after
them, and by carefully learning their profession. Tutors served by their
pupils in these five ways show sympathy to them in five ways. They make
sure they're well educated and well drilled in memorization. They
clearly explain all the knowledge of the profession. They introduce them
to their friends and colleagues. They provide protection in every
region.[1893](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1893){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1893
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Tutors served by their pupils in these five
ways show sympathy to them in these five ways. And that's how the
southern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

A husband should serve his wife as the western quarter in five ways: by
treating her with honor, by not looking down on her, by not being
unfaithful, by relinquishing authority to her, and by presenting her
with
adornments.[1894](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1894){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1894
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A wife served by her husband in these five
ways shows sympathy to him in five ways. She's well-organized in her
work. She manages the domestic help. She's not unfaithful. She preserves
his earnings. She's deft and tireless in all her duties. A wife served
by her husband in these five ways shows sympathy to him in these five
ways. And that's how the western quarter is covered, kept safe and free
of peril.

A gentleman should serve his friends and colleagues as the northern
quarter in five ways: giving, kindly words, taking care, equality, and
not using tricky words. Friends and colleagues served by a gentleman in
these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways. They guard him when
they're negligent. They guard his property when they're negligent. They
keep him safe in times of danger. They don't abandon him in times of
trouble. They honor his descendants. Friends and colleagues served by a
gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways.
And that's how the northern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of
peril.

A master should serve their bondservants and workers as the lower
quarter in five ways: by organizing work according to ability, by paying
food and wages, by nursing them when sick, by sharing special treats,
and by giving time off work. Bondservants and workers served by a master
in these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways. They get up first,
and go to bed last. They don't steal. They do their work well. And they
promote a good reputation. Bondservants and workers served by a master
in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways. And that's
how the lower quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

A gentleman should serve ascetics and brahmins as the upper quarter in
five ways: by loving deeds of body, speech, and mind, by not turning
them away at the gate, and by providing them with material needs.
Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman in these five ways show
sympathy to him in six ways. They keep him from doing bad. They support
him in doing good. They think of him with kindly thoughts. They teach
him what he does not know. They clarify what he's already learned. They
explain the path to heaven. Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman
in these five ways show sympathy to him in these six ways. And that's
how the upper quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril."

The Buddha spoke this matter. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Parents are the east,\
> tutors the south,\
> wives and child the west,\
> friends and colleagues the north,
>
> servants and workers below,\
> and ascetics and brahmins above.\
> By honoring these quarters\
> a householder does enough for their family.
>
> The astute and the virtuous,\
> the gentle and the articulate,\
> the humble and the kind:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> The diligent, not lazy,\
> those not disturbed by troubles,\
> those consistent in conduct, the intelligent:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> The inclusive, the makers of friends,\
> the bountiful, those rid of stinginess,\
> those who lead, train, and persuade:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> Giving and kindly words,\
> taking care here,\
> and treating equally in worldly conditions,\
> as befits them in each case;\
> these ways of being inclusive in the world\
> are like a moving chariot's linchpin.
>
> If there were no such ways of being inclusive,\
> neither mother nor father\
> would be respected and honored\
> for what they've done for their children.
>
> But since these ways of being inclusive do exist,\
> the astute do regard them well,\
> so they achieve greatness\
> and are praised."

When this was said, Sigālaka the householder's son said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the
Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the
Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="dn32">

## [DN 32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Āṭānāṭiya Protection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āṭānāṭiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

### 1. The First Recitation Section {.subheading}

[So I have
heard.[1895](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1895){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1895
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then, late at night, the
four great kings---with large armies of spirits, centaurs, goblins, and
dragons---set guards, troops, and wards at the four quarters and then,
lighting up the entire Vulture's Peak with their beauty, went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Before sitting down to one
side, some spirits bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite
conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some
announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

Seated to one side, the Great King Vessavaṇa said to the
Buddha,[1896](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1896){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1896
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, some high spirits have confidence in
the Buddha, some do not. Some middling spirits have confidence in the
Buddha, some do not. Some low spirits have confidence in the Buddha,
some do not. But mostly the spirits don't have confidence in the Buddha.
Why is that? Because the Buddha teaches them to refrain from killing
living creatures, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, and consuming
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. But mostly they don't refrain from
such things. They don't like that or approve of it.

Sir, there are disciples of the Buddha who frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the
madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat. There
dwell high spirits who have no confidence in the Buddha's dispensation.
To give them confidence, may the Buddha please learn the Āṭānāṭiya
protection for the guarding, protection, safety, and comfort of the
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, on that occasion Great King
Vessavaṇa recited the Āṭānāṭiya
protection.[1897](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1897){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1897
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "Hail
> Vipassī,[1898](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1898){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1898
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the glorious Clear-eyed One!\
> Hail Sikhī,\
> sympathetic for all beings!
>
> Hail Vessabhū,\
> cleansed and austere!\
> Hail Kakusandha,\
> crusher of Māra's army!
>
> Hail Koṇāgamana,\
> the brahmin who has lived the life!\
> Hail Kassapa,\
> everywhere free!
>
> Hail
> Aṅgīrasa,[1899](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1899){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1899
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the glorious Sakyan!\
> He taught this Dhamma\
> that dispels all suffering.
>
> Those in the world who are quenched,\
> truly discerning,\
> not backbiters; such people\
> being great of heart and intrepid,
>
> revere that Gotama;\
> he who is helpful to gods and humans,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct,\
> great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Where rises the
> sun---[1900](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1900){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1900
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Aditi's child, the great orb,\
> who in his rising\
> dispels the night,\
> and of whom, when sun has risen,\
> it is said to be the day---
>
> there is a deep lake,\
> an ocean of flowing waters.\
> That's how they understand that lake
> there,[1901](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1901){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1901
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> as an ocean of flowing waters.
>
> From here that is the eastern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the centaurs;\
> his name is Dhataraṭṭha.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the centaurs.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us
> skillfully;[1902](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1902){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1902
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> It's where the departed go, they
> say,[1903](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1903){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1903
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> who are dividers and backbiters,\
> killers and hunters,\
> bandits and frauds.
>
> From here that is the southern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the goblins;\
> his name is Virūḷha.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the goblins.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> Where sets the
> sun---[1904](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1904){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1904
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Aditi's child, the great orb,\
> who in his setting\
> ends the day,\
> and of whom, when sun has set,\
> it is said to be the night---
>
> there is a deep lake in that place,\
> an ocean of flowing waters.\
> That's how they understand that lake there,\
> as an ocean of flowing waters.
>
> From here that is the western quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the dragons;\
> his name is Virūpakkha.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the dragons.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> Where lovely Uttarakuru
> is,[1905](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1905){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1905
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the beautiful Mount
> Meru,[1906](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1906){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1906
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> humans born there\
> are unselfish, without
> possessions.[1907](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1907){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1907
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> They do not sow the seed,\
> nor do they draw the plough.\
> The rice eaten by
> people[1908](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1908){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1908
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> ripens in untilled soil,
>
> free of powder or husk, pure,\
> fragrant, with only the rice-grain.\
> After cooking in a tandoor
> oven,[1909](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1909){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1909
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> they enjoy eating that food.
>
> Having prepared a cow with hooves
> uncloven,[1910](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1910){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1910
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a beast with hooves uncloven,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having prepared a woman-drawn
> carriage,[1911](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1911){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1911
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a man-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having prepared a girl-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a boy-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having ascended their vehicle,\
> that king's servants\
> tour about in every quarter,
>
> provided with heavenly vehicles\
> of elephant and of horse.\
> And there are mansions and palanquins\
> for that great and glorious king.
>
> And he has cities, too,\
> well-built in the sky:\
> Āṭānāṭā, Kusināṭā,
> Parakusināṭā,[1912](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1912){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1912
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Nāṭapuriyā, and
> Parakusiṭanāṭā.[1913](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1913){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1913
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> To the north is
> Kapīvanta,[1914](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1914){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1914
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and Janogha lies
> beyond.[1915](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1915){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1915
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> And there's Navanavutiya,
> Ambara-ambaravatiya,[1916](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1916){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1916
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the royal capital named
> Āḷakamandā.[1917](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1917){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1917
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> The Great King Kuvera, dear sir,\
> has a capital named
> Visāṇā,[1918](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1918){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1918
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> which is why the great king\
> is called 'Vessavaṇa'.
>
> These each individually inform the King:\
> Tatolā, Tattalā,
> Tatotalā,[1919](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1919){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1919
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Ojasi, Tejasi,
> Tatojasi,[1920](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1920){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1920
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Sūra, Rājā, Ariṭṭha, and
> Nemi.[1921](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1921){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1921
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> There is a lake there too named
> Dharaṇī,[1922](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1922){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1922
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> whence the clouds rain forth,\
> and the rains disperse.\
> There is a hall there too named
> Sālavatī,[1923](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1923){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1923
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> where the spirits frequent.\
> There the trees are ever in fruit,\
> with many different flocks of birds.\
> Peacocks and herons call out there,\
> and the sweet cuckoos too.
>
> One bird cries out 'Live, live!',\
> another 'Lift up your heart!'\
> There are cocks and
> kookaburras,[1924](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1924){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1924
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and in the wood the
> woodpeckers.[1925](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1925){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1925
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> The parrots and mynah cry out there,\
> and the 'little stick-boy' birds.\
> Kuvera's pond of rushes\
> is lovely all the time.
>
> From here that is the northern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of spirits;\
> his name is Kuvera.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the spirits.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'

This, dear sir, is the Āṭānāṭiya protection for the guarding,
protection, safety, and comfort of the monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen.

The monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen should learn this Āṭānāṭiya
protection well and completely memorize it. If anyone who does so is
approached while walking, standing, sitting, or lying down by any
non-human being with malicious intent---including males, females, boys,
girls, chief ministers, councillors, and servants among the spirits,
centaurs, goblins, and dragons---that non-human will receive no homage
or respect in any village or town. And they will receive no ground or
dwelling in my capital of Ālakamandā. Nor will they get to go to the
conference of the spirits. In addition, the non-humans would not give or
take them in marriage. They'd heap personal abuse on them, drop an empty
bowl on their head, and even split their head into seven pieces!

For there are, dear sir, non-humans who are fierce, cruel, and violent.
They don't obey the Great Kings or their men or their men's men. They're
said to be rebelling against the Great Kings. They're just like the
bandits in the king of Magadha's realm who don't obey the king, his men,
or his men's men, and are said to be rebelling against the king.

If any non-human being with malicious intent---including males, females,
boys, girls, ministers, councillors, and servants among the spirits,
centaurs, goblins, and dragons---approaches a monk, nun, layman, or
laywoman while walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, one ought to
yell, cry, and scream to the spirits, great spirits, generals, great
generals: 'This spirit's got me! This spirit's entered me! This spirit's
annoying me! This spirit's harassing me! This spirit's hurting me! This
spirit's harming me! This spirit won't let me go!'

To what spirits, great spirits, generals, great generals?

> 'Indra, Soma, and
> Varuṇa,[1926](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1926){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1926
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Bhāradvāja, the
> Progenitor,[1927](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1927){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1927
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Candana and Kāmaseṭṭha,\
> Kinnughaṇḍu and Nighaṇḍu,
>
> Panāda and Opamañña,\
> and Mātali, the god's charioteer.\
> Cittasena the centaur,\
> and the kings Nala and Janesabha,
>
> Sātāgira, Hemavata,\
> Puṇṇaka, Karatiya, and
> Guḷa;[1928](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1928){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1928
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Sivaka and
> Mucalinda,[1929](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1929){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1929
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Vessāmitta,
> Yugandhara,[1930](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1930){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1930
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Gopāla,
> Suppagedha,[1931](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1931){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1931
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Hiri, Netti, and
> Mandiya;[1932](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1932){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1932
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Pañcālacaṇḍa,
> Āḷavaka,[1933](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1933){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1933
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Pajjunna, Sumana,
> Sumukha,[1934](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1934){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1934
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Dadhimukha, Maṇi, Māṇivara,
> Dīgha,[1935](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1935){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1935
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> together with
> Serīsaka.'[1936](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1936){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1936
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This, dear sir, is the Āṭānāṭiya protection for the guarding,
protection, safety, and comfort of the monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen. Well, now, dear sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much
to do."

"Please, Great Kings, go at your convenience."

Then the four great kings got up from their seats, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right side, before
vanishing right there. And before the other spirits present vanished,
some bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their
right side, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held
up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and
clan, while some kept silent.

The first recitation section is finished.

### 2. The Second Recitation Section {.subheading}

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, repeating all the verses spoken. Then he added:

"Mendicants, learn the Āṭānāṭiya protection! Memorize the Āṭānāṭiya
protection! Remember the Āṭānāṭiya protection! The Āṭānāṭiya protection
is beneficial, and is for the guarding, protection, safety, and comfort
of the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="dn33">

## [DN 33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reciting in Concert ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgītisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Mallas together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants when he arrived at a Mallian town named
Pāvā.[1937](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1937){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1937
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There he stayed in Cunda the smith's mango
grove.[1938](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1938){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1938
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time a new town hall named Ubbhaṭaka had recently been
constructed for the Mallas of Pāvā. It had not yet been occupied by an
ascetic or brahmin or any person at
all.[1939](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1939){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1939
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Mallas of Pāvā also heard that the
Buddha had arrived and was staying in Cunda's mango grove. Then they
went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, a new town hall named Ubbhaṭaka has recently been constructed for
the Mallas of Pāvā. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or
brahmin or any person at all. May the Buddha be the first to use it, and
only then will the Mallas of Pāvā use it. That would be for the lasting
welfare and happiness of the Mallas of Pāvā." The Buddha consented in
silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Mallas got up from
their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on
their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread
carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil
lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
told him of their preparations, saying, "Please, sir, come at your
convenience."

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new
town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet
he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east.
The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall,
and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in
front of them. The Mallas of Pāvā also washed their feet, entered the
town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha
right in front of them.

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the Mallas with a Dhamma talk. Then he dismissed them,
"The night is getting late,
Vāseṭṭhas.[1940](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1940){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1940
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please go at your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the Mallas. They got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before
leaving.

Soon after they left, the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants,
who were so very silent. He addressed Venerable Sāriputta, "Sāriputta,
the Saṅgha of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness. Give them
some Dhamma talk as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll stretch
it."[1941](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1941){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1941
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Sāriputta replied.

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had recently passed
away at
Pāvā.[1942](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1942){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1942
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With his passing the Jain ascetics split,
dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling, and disputing,
continually wounding each other with barbed words: "You don't understand
this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training.
What, you understand this teaching and training? You're practicing
wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You said last
what you should have said first. You said first what you should have
said last. What you've thought so much about has been disproved. Your
doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're trapped; get
yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics. And the Jain Ñātika's white-clothed lay disciples were
disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics. They
were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken
monument and without a refuge.

Then Sāriputta told the mendicants about these things. He went on to
say, "That's what happens, reverends, when a teaching and training is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. But
this teaching is well explained and well propounded to us by the Blessed
One, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a
fully awakened Buddha. You should all recite this in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans.

And what is that teaching?

### 1. Ones {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened
Buddha.[1943](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1943){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1943
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should all recite these in concert,
without disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans. What are the teachings grouped by one?

All sentient beings are sustained by
food.[1944](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1944){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1944
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

All sentient beings are sustained by
conditions.[1945](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1945){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1945
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained
by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened
Buddha.[1946](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1946){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1946
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should all recite these in concert,
without disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.

### 2. Twos {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by two?

Name and form.

Ignorance and craving for continued
existence.[1947](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1947){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1947
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Views favoring continued existence and views favoring ending
existence.[1948](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1948){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1948
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Lack of conscience and prudence.

Conscience and prudence.

Being hard to admonish and having bad friends.

Being easy to admonish and having good friends.

Skill in offenses and skill in resolving
offenses.[1949](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1949){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1949
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Skill in meditative attainments and skill in emerging from those
attainments.[1950](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1950){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1950
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Skill in the elements and skill in application of
mind.[1951](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1951){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1951
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Skill in the sense fields and skill in dependent
origination.[1952](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1952){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1952
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Skill in what is possible and skill in what is
impossible.[1953](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1953){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1953
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Integrity and scrupulousness.

Patience and sweetness.

Friendliness and hospitality.

Harmlessness and purity.

Lack of mindfulness and lack of situational awareness.

Mindfulness and situational awareness.

Not guarding the sense doors and eating too much.

Guarding the sense doors and moderation in eating.

The power of reflection and the power of
development.[1954](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1954){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1954
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The power of mindfulness and the power of immersion.

Serenity and discernment.

The basis of serenity and the basis of
exertion.[1955](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1955){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1955
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Exertion, and not being scattered.

Failure in ethics and failure in view.

Accomplishment in ethics and accomplishment in view.

Purification of ethics and purification of view.

Purification of view and making an effort in line with that view.

Inspiration, and making a suitable effort when inspired by inspiring
places.

To never be content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying.

Knowledge and freedom.

Knowledge of ending and knowledge of
non-arising.[1956](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1956){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1956
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 3. Threes {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by three that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by three?

*Three unskillful roots:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three skillful roots:* contentment, love, and understanding.

*Three ways of performing bad conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three ways of performing good conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three unskillful thoughts:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful thoughts:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful intentions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful intentions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful perceptions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful perceptions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful elements:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful elements:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Another three elements:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three elements:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Another three elements:* lower, middle, and
higher.[1957](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1957){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1957
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three cravings:* for sensual pleasures, to continue existence, and to
end existence.

*Another three cravings:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three cravings:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Three fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of
precepts and observances.

*Three defilements:* sensuality, desire for continued existence, and
ignorance.

*Three realms of existence:* sensual, form, and formless.

*Three searches:* for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path.

*Three kinds of discrimination:* 'I'm better', 'I'm equal', and 'I'm
worse'.

*Three periods:* past, future, and present.

*Three extremes:* substantial reality, the origin of substantial
reality, and the cessation of substantial
reality.[1958](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1958){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1958
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three feelings:* pleasure, pain, and neutral.

*Three forms of suffering:* the suffering inherent in painful feeling,
the suffering inherent in conditions, and the suffering inherent in
perishing.[1959](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1959){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1959
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three heaps:* the heap of surety in the wrong way, the heap of surety
in the right way, and the heap of lack of
surety.[1960](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1960){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1960
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three darknesses:* one is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and lacking
confidence about the past, future, and
present.[1961](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1961){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1961
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three things a Realized One need not hide:* The Realized One's behavior
by way of body, speech, and mind is pure. He has no misconduct in these
three ways that need be hidden, thinking: 'Don't let others find this
out about
me!'[1962](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1962){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1962
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three possessions:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three fires:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Another three fires:* a fire for those worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, a fire for householders, and a fire for those worthy of a
religious
donation.[1963](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1963){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1963
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Threefold classification of the physical:* visible and resistant,
invisible and resistant, and invisible and
non-resistant.[1964](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1964){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1964
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three choices:* good choices, bad choices, and imperturbable choices.

*Three individuals:* a trainee, an adept, and one who is neither a
trainee nor an
adept.[1965](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1965){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1965
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three seniors:* a senior by birth, a senior in the teaching, and a
senior by
convention.[1966](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1966){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1966
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three grounds for making merit:* giving, ethical conduct, and
meditation.

*Three grounds for accusations:* what is seen, heard, and suspected.

*Three kinds of sensual rebirth:* There are sentient beings who desire
what is present. They fall under the sway of presently arisen sensual
pleasures. Namely, humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld.
This is the first kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who
desire to create. Having repeatedly created, they fall under the sway of
sensual pleasures. Namely, the gods who love to imagine. This is the
second kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who desire
what is created by others. They fall under the sway of sensual pleasures
created by others. Namely, the gods who control what is imagined by
others. This is the third kind of sensual
rebirth.[1967](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1967){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1967
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three kinds of pleasant rebirth:* There are sentient beings who, having
repeatedly given rise to it, dwell in pleasure. Namely, the gods of the
Divinity's host. This is the first pleasant rebirth. There are sentient
beings who are drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with pleasure.
Every so often they feel inspired to exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what
bliss!' Namely, the gods of streaming radiance. This is the second
pleasant rebirth. There are sentient beings who are drenched, steeped,
filled, and soaked with pleasure. Since they're truly content, they
experience pleasure. Namely, the gods of universal beauty. This is the
third pleasant
rebirth.[1968](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1968){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1968
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three kinds of wisdom:* the wisdom of a trainee, the wisdom of an
adept, and the wisdom of one who is neither a trainee nor an
adept.[1969](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1969){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1969
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another three kinds of wisdom:* wisdom produced by thought, learning,
and
meditation.[1970](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1970){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1970
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three weapons:* learning, seclusion, and
wisdom.[1971](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1971){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1971
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three faculties:* the faculty of understanding that one's enlightenment
is imminent, the faculty of enlightenment, and the faculty of one who is
enlightened.[1972](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1972){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1972
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three eyes:* the eye of the flesh, the eye of clairvoyance, and the eye
of wisdom.

*Three trainings:* in higher ethics, higher mind, and higher wisdom.

*Three kinds of development:* the development of physical endurance, the
development of the mind, and the development of
wisdom.[1973](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1973){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1973
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three unsurpassable qualities:* unsurpassable seeing, practice, and
freedom.[1974](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1974){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1974
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three kinds of immersion:* Immersion with placing the mind and keeping
it connected. Immersion without placing the mind, merely keeping it
connected. Immersion without placing the mind or keeping it
connected.[1975](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1975){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1975
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another three kinds of immersion:* emptiness, signless, and
undirected.[1976](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1976){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1976
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three purities:* purity of body, speech, and
mind.[1977](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1977){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1977
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three kinds of sagacity:* sagacity of body, speech, and
mind.[1978](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1978){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1978
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three skills:* skill in progress, skill in regress, and skill in
means.[1979](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1979){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1979
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three vanities:* the vanity of health, the vanity of youth, and the
vanity of
life.[1980](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1980){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1980
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three ways of putting something in charge:* putting oneself, the world,
or the teaching in
charge.[1981](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1981){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1981
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three topics of discussion:* You might discuss the past: 'That is how
it was in the past.' You might discuss the future: 'That is how it will
be in the future.' Or you might discuss the present: 'This is how it is
at
present.'[1982](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1982){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1982
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three knowledges:* recollection of past lives, knowledge of the death
and rebirth of sentient beings, and knowledge of the ending of
defilements.

*Three meditative abidings:* the heavenly meditation, the divine
meditation, and the noble
meditation.[1983](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1983){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1983
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Three demonstrations:* The demonstration of psychic power, the
demonstration of revealing, and the demonstration of
instruction.[1984](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1984){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1984
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by three that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 4. Fours {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by four?

*Four kinds of mindfulness meditation:* It's when a mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

*Four right efforts:* A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an
effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities
don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are
given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm,
try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are completed by development.

*Four bases of psychic power:* A mendicant develops the basis of psychic
power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active
effort.

*Four absorptions:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

*Four ways of developing immersion further:* There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in the
present life. There is a way of developing immersion further that leads
to gaining knowledge and vision. There is a way of developing immersion
further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
blissful meditation in the present life? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
fourth absorption. This is the way of developing immersion further that
leads to blissful meditation in the present life.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision? A mendicant applies their mind to the
perception of light, focusing on the perception of day regardless of
whether it's night or day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart,
they develop a mind that's full of radiance. This is the way of
developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
mindfulness and awareness? A mendicant knows feelings as they arise, as
they remain, and as they go away. They know perceptions as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. This is the way of developing
immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the
ending of defilements? A mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in
the five grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such are feelings ... perceptions ...
choices ... consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is
the ending of consciousness.' This is the way of developing immersion
further that leads to the ending of
defilements.[1985](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1985){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1985
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four limitless states:* A mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of
love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the
fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around,
they spread a heart full of love to the whole world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. They meditate
spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.[1986](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1986){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1986
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four formless states:* A mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[1987](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1987){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1987
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four supports:* After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things, endures
some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some
things.[1988](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1988){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1988
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four noble traditions:* A mendicant is content with any kind of robe,
and praises such contentment. They don't try to get hold of a robe in an
improper way. They don't get upset if they don't get a robe. And if they
do get a robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawback, and understanding the escape. And on account of that they
don't glorify themselves or put others down. A mendicant who is deft,
tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient,
primordial noble tradition.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of almsfood ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings ...

Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys giving up and loves to give up. They
enjoy meditation and love to meditate. But they don't glorify themselves
or put down others on account of their love for giving up and
meditation. A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in
this is said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble
tradition.[1989](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1989){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1989
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four efforts:* The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to
preserve.[1990](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1990){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1990
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is the effort to restrain? When a
mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. This is
called the effort to restrain.

And what is the effort to give up? It's when a mendicant doesn't
tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that's arisen, but gives
it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. They don't
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them
up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called
the effort to give up.

And what is the effort to develop? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. This is
called the effort to develop.

And what is the effort to preserve? It's when a mendicant preserves a
meditation subject that's a fine basis of immersion: the perception of a
skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse,
or a bloated corpse. This is called the effort to preserve.

*Four knowledges:* knowledge of the present phenomena, inferential
knowledge, knowledge of others' minds, and conventional
knowledge.[1991](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1991){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1991
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another four knowledges:* knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.

*Four factors of stream-entry:* associating with true persons, listening
to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in
line with the
teaching.[1992](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1992){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1992
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four factors of a stream-enterer:* A noble disciple has experiential
confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They have experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' They have
experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples is practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and
proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is
the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field
of merit for the world.' And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved
by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred,
liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion.[1993](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1993){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1993
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four fruits of the ascetic life:* stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and
perfection.[1994](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1994){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1994
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four elements:* earth, water, fire, and air.

*Four foods:* solid food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the
second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the
fourth.[1995](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1995){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1995
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four bases for consciousness to remain:* As long as consciousness
remains, it remains involved with form, supported by form, founded on
form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it grows, increases, and
matures. Or consciousness remains involved with feeling ... Or
consciousness remains involved with perception ... Or as long as
consciousness remains, it remains involved with choices, supported by
choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it
grows, increases, and
matures.[1996](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1996){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1996
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four prejudices:* making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and
cowardice.[1997](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1997){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1997
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four things that give rise to craving:* Craving arises in a mendicant
for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that
state.[1998](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1998){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1998
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ways of practice:* painful practice with slow insight, painful
practice with swift insight, pleasant practice with slow insight, and
pleasant practice with swift
insight.[1999](#endnotes.xhtml_note-1999){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-1999
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another four ways of practice:* impatient practice, patient practice,
taming practice, and calming practice.

*Four footprints of the Dhamma:* contentment, good will, right
mindfulness, and right
immersion.[2000](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2000){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2000
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ways of taking up practices:* There is a way of taking up
practices that is painful now and results in future pain. There is a way
of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future
pleasure. There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that is
pleasant now and results in future pleasure.

*Four spectrums of the teaching:* ethics, immersion, wisdom, and
freedom.

*Four powers:* energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom.[2001](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2001){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2001
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four foundations:* the foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and
peace.[2002](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2002){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2002
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ways of answering questions:* There is a question that should be
answered categorically. There is a question that should be answered
analytically. There is a question that should be answered with a
counter-question. There is a question that should be set
aside.[2003](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2003){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2003
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four deeds:* There are deeds that are dark with dark result. There are
deeds that are bright with bright result. There are deeds that are dark
and bright with dark and bright
result.[2004](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2004){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2004
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are neither dark nor bright deeds
with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of
deeds.[2005](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2005){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2005
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four things to be realized:* Past lives are to be realized with
recollection. The passing away and rebirth of sentient beings is to be
realized with vision. The eight liberations are to be realized with
direct meditative experience. The ending of defilements is to be
realized with
wisdom.[2006](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2006){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2006
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four floods:* the floods of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[2007](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2007){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2007
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four yokes:* the yokes of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[2008](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2008){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2008
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four unyokings:* unyoking from the yokes of sensuality, desire for
rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*Four ties:* the personal ties to covetousness, ill will,
misapprehension of precepts and observances, and the insistence that
this is the only
truth.[2009](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2009){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2009
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four kinds of grasping:* grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts
and observances, and theories of a self.

*Four kinds of reproduction:* reproduction for creatures born from an
egg, from a womb, from moisture, or
spontaneously.[2010](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2010){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2010
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four kinds of conception:* Someone is unaware when conceived in their
mother's womb, unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge.
This is the first kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when
conceived in their mother's womb, but unaware as they remain there, and
unaware as they emerge. This is the second kind of conception.
Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived
in their mother's womb, aware as they remain there, and aware as they
emerge. This is the fourth kind of
conception.[2011](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2011){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2011
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four kinds of reincarnation in a life-form:* There is a reincarnation
in a life-form where only one's own intention is effective, not that of
others. There is a reincarnation in a life-form where only the intention
of others is effective, not one's own. There is a reincarnation in a
life-form where both one's own and others' intentions are effective.
There is a reincarnation in a life-form where neither one's own nor
others' intentions are
effective.[2012](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2012){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2012
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ways of purifying a religious donation:* There's a religious
donation that's purified by the giver, not the recipient. There's a
religious donation that's purified by the recipient, not the giver.
There's a religious donation that's purified by neither the giver nor
the recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified by both the
giver and the
recipient.[2013](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2013){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2013
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ways of being inclusive:* giving, kindly words, taking care, and
equality.[2014](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2014){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2014
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four ignoble expressions:* speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical.[2015](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2015){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2015
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Four noble expressions:* refraining from speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought,
or known something, but you haven't.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you haven't.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you have.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought, or
known something, and you have.

*Four persons:* One person mortifies themselves, committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves. One person mortifies others,
committed to the practice of mortifying others. One person mortifies
themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying
themselves and others. One person doesn't mortify either themselves or
others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or
others. They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become
divine.[2016](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2016){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2016
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another four persons:* One person practices to benefit themselves, but
not others. One person practices to benefit others, but not themselves.
One person practices to benefit neither themselves nor others. One
person practices to benefit both themselves and others.

*Another four persons:* the dark bound for darkness, the dark bound for
light, the light bound for darkness, and the light bound for
light.[2017](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2017){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2017
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Another four persons:* the confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic,
the pink lotus ascetic, and the exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.[2018](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2018){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2018
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

The first recitation section is finished.

### 5. Fives {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by five?

*Five aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.[2019](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2019){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2019
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five grasping aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

*Five kinds of sensual stimulation:* Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

*Five destinations:* hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity,
and the
gods.[2020](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2020){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2020
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five kinds of stinginess:* stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the
teachings.[2021](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2021){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2021
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five hindrances:* sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

*Five lower fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, sensual desire, and ill will.

*Five higher fetters:* desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form,
desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and
ignorance.

*Five precepts:* refraining from killing living creatures, stealing,
sexual misconduct, lying, and consuming beer, wine, and liquor which are
a basis for negligence.

*Five things that can't be done:* A mendicant with defilements ended
can't deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something
with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store
up goods for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay
person.[2022](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2022){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2022
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five losses:* loss of relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and view. It
is not because of loss of relatives, wealth, or health that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics
or view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.[2023](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2023){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2023
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five endowments:* endowment with relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and
view. It is not because of endowment with family, wealth, or health that
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. It is because of endowment with ethics or
view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

*Five drawbacks for an unethical person because of their failure in
ethics:* Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
gets a bad reputation. This is the second drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and embarrassed,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
feels lost when they die. This is the fourth drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. This is the fifth
drawback.[2024](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2024){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2024
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five benefits for an ethical person because of their accomplishment in
ethics:* Firstly, an ethical person gains great wealth on account of
diligence. This is the first benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person
gets a good reputation. This is the second benefit. Furthermore, an
ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and self-assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person dies
not feeling lost. This is the fourth benefit. Furthermore, when an
ethical person's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth benefit.

*A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first establish five
things in themselves:* I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong
time. I will speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not
harshly. I will speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak
lovingly, not from secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another
should first establish these five things in
themselves.[2025](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2025){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2025
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five factors that support meditation:* A mendicant has faith in the
Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely ill or unwell. Their
stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or deceitful. They
reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual
companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful
qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly
vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful
qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing
away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of
suffering.[2026](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2026){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2026
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five pure abodes:* Aviha, Atappa, the gods fair to see, the fair seeing
gods, and
Akaniṭṭha.[2027](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2027){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2027
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five non-returners:* one who is extinguished between one life and the
next, one who is extinguished upon landing, one who is extinguished
without extra effort, one who is extinguished with extra effort, and one
who heads upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha
realm.[2028](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2028){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2028
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five kinds of hard-heartedness:* Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about
the Teacher. They're uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first kind of hard-heartedness.
Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual
companions, resentful and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the fifth kind of
hard-heartedness.[2029](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2029){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2029
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five shackles of the heart:* Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed,
desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
This being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first shackle of the heart.
Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
bellies are full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one
of the orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or
fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the
heart.[2030](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2030){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2030
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five faculties:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.

*Another five faculties:* pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and
equanimity.

*Another five faculties:* faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom.

*Five elements of escape:* Take a case where a mendicant focuses on
sensual pleasures, but on that their mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided. But when they focus on
renunciation, on that their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided. Their mind is in a good state, well
developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from sensual
pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don't experience that
kind of feeling. This is how the escape from sensual pleasures is
explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is
explained.[2031](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2031){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2031
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five opportunities for freedom:* Firstly, the Teacher or a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. That mendicant feels
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how
the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches it. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.
This is the first opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. ...
Or the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or the mendicant thinks about and considers the
teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in
that Dhamma, no matter how a meditation subject as a basis of immersion
is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed. This is the fifth opportunity for
freedom.[2032](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2032){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2032
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Five perceptions that ripen in freedom:* the perception of
impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence, the
perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up, and
the perception of fading
away.[2033](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2033){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2033
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 6. Sixes {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by six?

*Six interior sense fields:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six exterior sense fields:* sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches,
and ideas.

*Six classes of consciousness:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
consciousness.

*Six classes of contact:* contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, and mind.

*Six classes of feeling:* feeling born of contact through the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six classes of perception:* perceptions of sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six bodies of intention:* intention regarding sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six classes of craving:* craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touches, and ideas.

*Six kinds of disrespect:* A mendicant lacks respect and reverence for
the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, the training, diligence, and
hospitality.[2034](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2034){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2034
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six kinds of respect:* A mendicant has respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, the training, diligence, and
hospitality.[2035](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2035){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2035
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six preoccupations with happiness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for happiness. Hearing a sound
with the ear ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor
with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, one is
preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for
happiness.[2036](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2036){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2036
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six preoccupations with sadness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for sadness. ... Knowing an idea
with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for
sadness.

*Six preoccupations with equanimity:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one
is preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for equanimity. ... Knowing
an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis
for equanimity.

*Six warm-hearted qualities:* Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats
their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in
private. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. This
warm-hearted quality too makes for fondness and respect, conducing to
inclusion, harmony, and unity, without
quarreling.[2037](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2037){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2037
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six roots of arguments:* Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and
acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don't fulfill the
training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the
detriment and suffering of the people, for the harm, detriment, and
suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a root of arguments in
yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. If you
don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come up in the
future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so it doesn't
come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... They're devious and deceitful ... They have
corrupt wishes and wrong view ... They're attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

*Six elements:* earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

*Six elements of escape:* Take a mendicant who says: 'I've developed the
heart's release by love. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my
basis, kept it up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet
somehow ill will still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the heart's
release by love has been developed and properly implemented, yet somehow
ill will still occupies the mind. For it is the heart's release by love
that is the escape from ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow discontent
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by rejoicing that is the escape from
discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow desire
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by equanimity that is the escape from
desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow my
consciousness still follows after signs.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! ... For it is the signless release of the heart that is the
escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupy the mind. For
it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from the
dart of doubt and
indecision.'[2038](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2038){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2038
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six unsurpassable things:* the unsurpassable seeing, listening,
acquisition, training, service, and
recollection.[2039](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2039){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2039
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six topics for recollection:* the recollection of the Buddha, the
teaching, the Saṅgha, ethics, generosity, and the deities.

*Six consistent responses:* A mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes,
is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.
Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor with their nose ...
Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a touch with their body
... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad. They
remain equanimous, mindful and
aware.[2040](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2040){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2040
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six classes of rebirth:* Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a
dark result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright
result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to extinguishment,
which is neither dark nor bright. Someone born into a bright class gives
rise to a bright result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
a dark result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor
bright.[2041](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2041){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2041
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Six perceptions that help penetration:* the perception of impermanence,
the perception of suffering in impermanence, the perception of not-self
in suffering, the perception of giving up, the perception of fading
away, and the perception of
cessation.[2042](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2042){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2042
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 7. Sevens {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by seven?

*Seven riches of the noble ones:* the riches of faith, ethics,
conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.[2043](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2043){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2043
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven awakening factors:* mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

*Seven prerequisites for immersion:* right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right
mindfulness.[2044](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2044){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2044
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven bad qualities:* a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent,
unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless.[2045](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2045){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2045
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven good qualities:* a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
learned, energetic, mindful, and
wise.[2046](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2046){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2046
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven aspects of the teachings of the true persons:* a mendicant knows
the teachings, knows the meaning, knows themselves, knows moderation,
knows the right time, knows assemblies, and knows
people.[2047](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2047){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2047
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven qualifications for graduation:* A mendicant has a keen enthusiasm
to undertake the training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of
desires ... for retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and
alertness ... to penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these
desires in the
future.[2048](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2048){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2048
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven perceptions:* the perception of impermanence, the perception of
not-self, the perception of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the
perception of giving up, the perception of fading away, and the
perception of
cessation.[2049](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2049){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2049
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven powers:* faith, energy, conscience, prudence, mindfulness,
immersion, and
wisdom.[2050](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2050){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2050
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven planes of consciousness:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of
consciousness.[2051](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2051){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2051
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Seven persons worthy of a religious donation:* one freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, and a follower by faith.

*Seven underlying tendencies:* sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven fetters:* attraction, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to
be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven principles for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that
might arise:* Resolution face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through
recollection to be granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be
granted. Acting according to what has been admitted. Majority decision.
Further penalty. Covering over as if with
grass.[2052](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2052){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2052
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

The second recitation section is finished.

### 8. Eights {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by eight?

*Eight wrong ways:* wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion.

*Eight right ways:* right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

*Eight persons worthy of a religious donation:* The stream-enterer and
the one practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. The
once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and the one practicing for
perfection.

*Eight grounds for laziness:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do.
They think: 'I have some work to do. But while doing it my body will get
tired. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the second ground for
laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the fourth
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy and unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load
of beans. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the seventh
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
laziness.[2053](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2053){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2053
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight grounds for arousing energy:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work
to do. They think: 'I have some work to do. While working it's not easy
to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively
rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized.' They rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up
energy... This is the second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the fifth
ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the sixth ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the
seventh ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

*Eight reasons to give:* A person might give a gift after insulting the
recipient. Or they give out of fear. Or they give thinking, 'They gave
to me.' Or they give thinking, 'They'll give to me.' Or they give
thinking, 'It's good to give.' Or they give thinking, 'I cook, they
don't. It wouldn't be right for me to not give to them.' Or they give
thinking, 'By giving this gift I'll get a good reputation.' Or they give
thinking, 'This is an adornment and requisite for the
mind.'[2054](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2054){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2054
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight rebirths by giving:* First, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins
such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. Whatever they give they expect
back. They see an affluent aristocrat or brahmin or householder amusing
themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death,
I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins
or
householders!'[2055](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2055){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2055
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They settle on that thought, stabilize it,
and develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed further,
their thought leads to rebirth
there.[2056](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2056){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2056
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I say that this is only for those of
ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's wish of an ethical
person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've
heard:[2057](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2057){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2057
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The gods of the four great kings are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods of the four great kings!' They settle on that thought, stabilize
it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed
further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that this is
only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's
wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard: 'The gods of the thirty-three ... the
gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ...
the gods who control what is imagined by others are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not
developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that
this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The
heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. Whatever they give they expect back. And they've heard: 'The
gods of the Divinity's host are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.'
They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be
reborn in the company of the gods of the Divinity's host!' They settle
on that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for
less and not developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there.
But I say that this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the
unethical. And for those free of desire, not those with
desire.[2058](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2058){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2058
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The heart's wish of an ethical person
succeeds because of their freedom from
desire.[2059](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2059){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2059
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight assemblies:* the assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great
kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of
Māras. An assembly of
divinities.[2060](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2060){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2060
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight worldly conditions:* gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and
praise, pleasure and
pain.[2061](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2061){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2061
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight dimensions of mastery:* Perceiving form internally, someone sees
forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they
perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower
that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the eighth dimension of
mastery.[2062](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2062){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2062
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Eight liberations:* Having physical form, they see forms. This is the
first liberation.

Not perceiving physical form internally, they see forms externally. This
is the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth
liberation.[2063](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2063){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2063
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 9. Nines {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by nine?

*Nine grounds for resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to me,' you
harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing wrong to me' ... 'They will
do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong by someone I love' ... 'They are
doing wrong by someone I love' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I
love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ... 'They are helping someone
I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike,' you harbor
resentment.[2064](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2064){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2064
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Nine methods to get rid of resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to
me, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment. Thinking:
'They are doing wrong to me ...' ... 'They will do wrong to me ...' ...
'They did wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They are doing wrong by
someone I love ...' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I love ...' ...
'They helped someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I
dislike ...' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what
can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment.

*Nine abodes of sentient beings:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.[2065](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2065){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2065
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Nine lost opportunities for spiritual practice:* Firstly, a Realized
One has arisen in the world. He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace,
extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person
has been reborn in hell. This is the first lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn among the titans. This is the fourth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the fifth
lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not
go.[2066](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2066){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2066
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the sixth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the seventh lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, idiotic, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the eighth lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, no Realized One has arisen in the world, so there is no
teaching of the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person is reborn in a central country.
And they're wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well
said from what is poorly said. This is the ninth lost opportunity for
spiritual
practice.[2067](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2067){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2067
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Nine progressive meditations:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. Going totally beyond perceptions
of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception
and
feeling.[2068](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2068){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2068
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Nine progressive cessations:* For someone who has attained the first
absorption, sensual perceptions have ceased. For someone who has
attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected have ceased. For someone who has attained the third
absorption, rapture has ceased. For someone who has attained the fourth
absorption, breathing has ceased. For someone who has attained the
dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. For
someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. For someone
who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For someone who has
attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the
perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. For someone who
has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and
feeling have
ceased.[2069](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2069){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2069
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 10. Tens {.subheading}

There are teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by ten?

*Ten qualities that serve as protector:* Firstly, a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault,
they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is a quality that serves as
protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long
ago.[2070](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2070){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2070
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too is a quality that serves as
protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as
protector.[2071](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2071){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2071
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Ten universal dimensions of meditation:* Someone perceives the
meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and
limitless. They perceive the meditation on universal water ... the
meditation on universal fire ... the meditation on universal air ... the
meditation on universal blue ... the meditation on universal yellow ...
the meditation on universal red ... the meditation on universal white
... the meditation on universal space ... They perceive the meditation
on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and
limitless.[2072](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2072){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2072
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Ten ways of doing unskillful deeds:* killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view.

*Ten ways of doing skillful deeds:* refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will,
and right view.

*Ten abodes of the noble ones:* A mendicant has given up five factors,
possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has
eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given
up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical
process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? A mendicant, seeing a
sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous,
mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor
with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a
touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're
neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. That's
how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated,
thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.
That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when they've
given up sensual, malicious, and cruel intentions. That's how a
mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by
wisdom.[2073](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2073){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2073
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*Ten qualities of an adept:* an adept's right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom.[2074](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2074){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2074
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Reverends, these are the teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Sāriputta, "Good, good,
Sāriputta! It's good that you've taught this exposition of the reciting
in concert."

That is what Venerable Sāriputta said, and the teacher approved.
Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="dn34">

## [DN 34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Up to Ten ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dasuttarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā
on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond together with a large Saṅgha of
five hundred
mendicants.[2075](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2075){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2075
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There Sāriputta addressed the
mendicants:[2076](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2076){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2076
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

> "I will relate the
> teachings[2077](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2077){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2077
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> up to ten for attaining extinguishment,\
> for making an end of suffering,\
> the release from all
> ties.[2078](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2078){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2078
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

### 1. Groups of One {.subheading}

Reverends, one thing is helpful, one thing should be developed, one
thing should be completely understood, one thing should be given up, one
thing makes things worse, one thing leads to distinction, one thing is
hard to comprehend, one thing should be produced, one thing should be
directly known, one thing should be
realized.[2079](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2079){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2079
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What one thing is helpful?* Diligence in skillful
qualities.[2080](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2080){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2080
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What one thing should be developed?* Mindfulness of the body that is
full of
pleasure.[2081](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2081){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2081
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What one thing should be completely understood?* Contact, which is
accompanied by defilements and is prone to fuel
grasping.[2082](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2082){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2082
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What one thing should be given up?* The conceit 'I am'.

*What one thing makes things worse?* Irrational application of mind.

*What one thing leads to distinction?* Rational application of mind.

*What one thing is hard to comprehend?* The heart's immersion of
immediate
result.[2083](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2083){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2083
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What one thing should be produced?* Unshakable knowledge.

*What one thing should be directly known?* All sentient beings are
sustained by food.

*What one thing should be realized?* The unshakable release of the
heart.

So these ten things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 2. Groups of Two {.subheading}

Two things are helpful, two things should be developed, two things
should be completely understood, two things should be given up, two
things make things worse, two things lead to distinction, two things are
hard to comprehend, two things should be produced, two things should be
directly known, two things should be
realized.[2084](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2084){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2084
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What two things are helpful?* Mindfulness and situational awareness.

*What two things should be developed?* Serenity and discernment.

*What two things should be completely understood?* Name and form.

*What two things should be given up?* Ignorance and craving for
continued existence.

*What two things make things worse?* Being hard to admonish and having
bad friends.

*What two things lead to distinction?* Being easy to admonish and having
good friends.

*What two things are hard to comprehend?* What are the causes and
reasons for the corruption of sentient beings, and what are the causes
and reasons for the purification of sentient beings.

*What two things should be produced?* Two knowledges: knowledge of
ending, and knowledge of non-arising.

*What two things should be directly known?* Two elements: the
conditioned element and the unconditioned
element.[2085](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2085){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2085
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What two things should be realized?* Knowledge and freedom.

So these twenty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 3. Groups of Three {.subheading}

Three things are helpful, etc.

*What three things are helpful?* Associating with true persons,
listening to the true teaching, and practicing in line with the
teaching.[2086](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2086){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2086
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What three things should be developed?* Three kinds of immersion.
Immersion with placing the mind and keeping it connected. Immersion
without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. Immersion without
placing the mind or keeping it connected.

*What three things should be completely understood?* Three feelings:
pleasant, painful, and neutral.

*What three things should be given up?* Three cravings: craving for
sensual pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving to end
existence.

*What three things make things worse?* Three unskillful roots: greed,
hate, and delusion.

*What three things lead to distinction?* Three skillful roots:
contentment, love, and understanding.

*What three things are hard to comprehend?* Three elements of escape.
Renunciation is the escape from sensual pleasures. The formless is the
escape from form. Cessation is the escape from whatever is created,
conditioned, and dependently
originated.[2087](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2087){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2087
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What three things should be produced?* Three knowledges: knowledge
regarding the past portion, the future portion, and the present
portion.[2088](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2088){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2088
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What three things should be directly known?* Three elements:
sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*What three things should be realized?* Three knowledges: recollection
of past lives, knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings,
and knowledge of the ending of defilements.

So these thirty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 4. Groups of Four {.subheading}

Four things are helpful, etc.

*What four things are helpful?* Four situations: living in a suitable
region, relying on true persons, being rightly resolved in oneself, and
past
merit.[2089](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2089){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2089
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What four things should be developed?* The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. A mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

*What four things should be completely understood?* Four foods: solid
food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental intention
the third, and consciousness the fourth.

*What four things should be given up?* Four floods: sensuality, desire
for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things make things worse?* Four yokes: the yokes of
sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things lead to distinction?* Four kinds of unyoking: unyoking
from the yokes of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things are hard to comprehend?* Four kinds of immersion:
immersion liable to decline, stable immersion, immersion that leads to
distinction, and immersion that leads to
penetration.[2090](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2090){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2090
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What four things should be produced?* Four knowledges: knowledge of the
present phenomena, inferential knowledge, knowledge of others' minds,
and conventional knowledge.

*What four things should be directly known?* The four noble truths:
suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

*What four things should be realized?* Four fruits of the ascetic life:
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection.

So these forty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 5. Groups of Five {.subheading}

Five things are helpful, etc.

*What five things are helpful?* Five factors that support meditation. A
mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely
ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or
deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible
spiritual companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering.

*What five things should be developed?* Right immersion with five
factors: pervasion with rapture, pervasion with pleasure, pervasion with
mind, pervasion with light, and the basis for
reviewing.[2091](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2091){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2091
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What five things should be completely understood?* Five grasping
aggregates: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

*What five things should be given up?* Five hindrances: sensual desire,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

*What five things make things worse?* Five kinds of hard-heartedness.
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness. Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts
about the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is
angry and upset with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed
off. This being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness,
commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the fifth kind of
hard-heartedness.

*What five things lead to distinction?* Five faculties: faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

*What five things are hard to comprehend?* Five elements of escape. A
mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but on that their mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided. But when
they focus on renunciation, on that their mind leaps forth, gains
confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. Their mind is in a good
state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from
sensual pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don't
experience that kind of feeling. This is how the escape from sensual
pleasures is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.

*What five things should be produced?* Right immersion with five
knowledges. The following knowledges arise for you personally: 'This
immersion is blissful now, and results in bliss in the future.' 'This
immersion is noble and not of the flesh.' 'This immersion is not
cultivated by sinners.' 'This immersion is peaceful and sublime and
tranquil and unified, not held in place by forceful suppression.' 'I
mindfully enter into and emerge from this immersion.'

*What five things should be directly known?* Five opportunities for
freedom. Firstly, the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches
Dhamma to a mendicant. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how the Teacher or a respected
spiritual companion teaches it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the first opportunity for
freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it.
That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that
Dhamma, no matter how they teach it in detail to others as they learned
and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful,
rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes
tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful,
the mind becomes immersed. This is the second opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma. But the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning
and the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how they recite it in detail
as they learned and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the third opportunity
for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching. But the
mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart,
examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. That
mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma,
no matter how they think about and consider it in their heart, examining
it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy
springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels
bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the fourth
opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching ... or
think about it. But a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in
that Dhamma, no matter how a meditation subject as a basis of immersion
is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed. This is the fifth opportunity for freedom.

*What five things should be realized?* Five spectrums of the teaching:
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom.

So these fifty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 6. Groups of Six {.subheading}

Six things are helpful, etc.

*What six things are helpful?* Six warm-hearted qualities. Firstly, a
mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily
kindness, both in public and in private. This warm-hearted quality makes
for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity,
without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

*What six things should be developed?* Six topics for recollection: the
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, ethics,
generosity, and the deities.

*What six things should be completely understood?* Six interior sense
fields: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*What six things should be given up?* Six classes of craving: craving
for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

*What six things make things worse?* Six kinds of disrespect. A
mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, the training, diligence, and hospitality.

*What six things lead to distinction?* Six kinds of respect. A mendicant
has respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha,
the training, diligence, and hospitality.

*What six things are hard to comprehend?* Six elements of escape. Take a
mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by love. I've
cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it up, consolidated
it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow ill will still occupies my
mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! Don't say that. Don't
misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha is not
good. And the Buddha would not say that. It's impossible, reverend, it
cannot happen that the heart's release by love has been developed and
properly implemented, yet somehow ill will still occupies the mind. For
it is the heart's release by love that is the escape from ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. ... Yet somehow discontent still occupies my mind.' They
should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by
rejoicing that is the escape from discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. ... Yet somehow desire still occupies my mind.' They should
be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by
equanimity that is the escape from desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. ... Yet somehow my consciousness still follows after signs.'
They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the signless
release of the heart that is the escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupy the mind. For
it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from the
dart of doubt and indecision.'

*What six things should be produced?* Six consistent responses. A
mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad.
They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their
ears ... Smelling an odor with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with
their tongue ...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware.

*What six things should be directly known?* Six unsurpassable things:
the unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection.

*What six things should be realized?* Six direct knowledges. A mendicant
wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

So these sixty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 7. Groups of Seven {.subheading}

Seven things are helpful, etc.

*What seven things are helpful?* Seven riches of the noble ones: the
riches of faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.

*What seven things should be developed?* Seven awakening factors:
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity.

*What seven things should be completely understood?* Seven planes of
consciousness. There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and
diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld. This is the first plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

*What seven things should be given up?* Seven underlying tendencies:
sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn,
and ignorance.

*What seven things make things worse?* Seven bad qualities: a mendicant
is faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless.

*What seven things lead to distinction?* Seven good qualities: a
mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic,
mindful, and wise.

*What seven things are hard to comprehend?* Seven aspects of the
teachings of the true persons: a mendicant knows the teachings, knows
the meaning, knows themselves, knows moderation, knows the right time,
knows assemblies, and knows people.

*What seven things should be produced?* Seven perceptions: the
perception of impermanence, the perception of not-self, the perception
of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the perception of giving up,
the perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation.

*What seven things should be directly known?* Seven qualifications for
graduation. A mendicant has a keen enthusiasm to undertake the training
... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of desires ... for retreat
... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and alertness ... to
penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these desires in the
future.

*What seven things should be realized?* Seven powers of one who has
ended the defilements. Firstly, a mendicant with defilements ended has
clearly seen with right wisdom all conditions as truly impermanent. This
is a power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to
claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen with
right wisdom that sensual pleasures are truly like a pit of glowing
coals. ...

Furthermore, the mind of a mendicant with defilements ended slants,
slopes, and inclines to seclusion. They're withdrawn, loving
renunciation, and have totally eliminated defiling influences. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
five faculties. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
seven awakening factors. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
noble eightfold path. ... This is a power that a mendicant who has ended
the defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

So these seventy things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

The first recitation section is finished.

### 8. Groups of Eight {.subheading}

Eight things are helpful, etc.

*What eight things are helpful?* There are eight causes and reasons that
lead to acquiring the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life, and to
its increase, growth, development, and fulfillment once it has been
acquired. What eight? It's when a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher
or a spiritual companion in a teacher's role. And they set up a keen
sense of conscience and prudence for them, with warmth and respect. This
is the first cause.

When a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion
in a teacher's role---with a keen sense of conscience and prudence for
them, with warmth and respect---from time to time they go and ask them
questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?' Those
venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is the second cause.

After hearing that teaching they perfect withdrawal of both body and
mind. This is the third cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
This is the fourth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This is the
fifth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the sixth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This is the seventh cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five
grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is
the ending of form. Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such
is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the origin of
perception, such is the ending of perception. Such are choices, such is
the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' This is the eighth
cause.[2092](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2092){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2092
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What eight things should be developed?* The noble eightfold path, that
is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

*What eight things should be completely understood?* Eight worldly
conditions: gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure
and pain.

*What eight things should be given up?* Eight wrong ways: wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion.

*What eight things make things worse?* Eight grounds for laziness.
Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work
to do. But while doing it my body will get tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the second ground for
laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the fourth
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.'... This is the fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy, unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load of
beans. I'd better have a lie down.'... They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the seventh
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the eighth ground for laziness.

*What eight things lead to distinction?* Eight grounds for arousing
energy. Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have
some work to do. While working it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized.' They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving
the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground
for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the
second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up
energy.'... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up
energy.'... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the fifth ground for arousing
energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy.'... This is the sixth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the seventh ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

*What eight things are hard to comprehend?* Eight lost opportunities for
spiritual practice. Firstly, a Realized One has arisen in the world. He
teaches the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person has been reborn in hell. This
is the first lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the
world.[2093](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2093){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2093
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But person has been reborn in one of the
long-lived orders of gods. This is the fourth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go. This is the fifth lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the sixth lost opportunity
for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, idiotic, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the seventh lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, no Realized One has arisen in the
world,[2094](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2094){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2094
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} so there is no teaching of the Dhamma
leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy
One. But a person is reborn in a central country. And they're wise,
bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well said from what is
poorly said. This is the eighth lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

*What eight things should be produced?* Eight thoughts of a great man.
'This teaching is for those of few wishes, not those of many wishes.
It's for the contented, not those who lack contentment. It's for the
secluded, not those who enjoy company. It's for the energetic, not the
lazy. It's for the mindful, not the unmindful. It's for those with
immersion, not those without immersion. It's for the wise, not the
witless. This teaching is for those who don't enjoy proliferating, not
for those who enjoy
proliferating.'[2095](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2095){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2095
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What eight things should be directly known?* Eight dimensions of
mastery. Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower
that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the eighth dimension of mastery.

*What eight things should be realized?* Eight liberations. Having
physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving physical form internally, someone see forms externally.
This is the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

So these eighty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 9. Groups of Nine {.subheading}

Nine things are helpful, etc.

*What nine things are helpful?* Nine things rooted in rational
application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, joy springs up.
When you're joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel
bliss. And when you're blissful, the mind becomes immersed. When your
mind is immersed, you truly know and see. When you truly know and see,
you grow disillusioned. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When
desire fades away you're
freed.[2096](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2096){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2096
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What nine things should be developed?* Nine factors of trying to be
pure. The factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind, view, overcoming
doubt, knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the
path, knowledge and vision of the practice, knowledge and vision,
wisdom, and
freedom.[2097](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2097){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2097
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What nine things should be completely understood?* Nine abodes of
sentient beings. There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and
diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld. This is the first abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.

*What nine things should be given up?* Nine things rooted in craving.
Craving is a cause of seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material
things. Gaining material things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is
a cause of desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment.
Attachment is a cause of ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess.
Stinginess is a cause of safeguarding. Owing to safeguarding, many bad,
unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels,
arguments, disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and
lies.[2098](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2098){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2098
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What nine things make things worse?* Nine grounds for resentment.
Thinking: 'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They
are doing wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did
wrong by someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love'
... 'They will do wrong by someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I
dislike' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They
will help someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment.

*What nine things lead to distinction?* Nine methods to get rid of
resentment. Thinking: 'They did wrong to me, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing wrong to me
...' ... 'They will do wrong to me ...' ... 'They did wrong by someone I
love ...' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They
will do wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They helped someone I dislike
...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ... Thinking: 'They
will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid of
resentment.

*What nine things are hard to comprehend?* Nine kinds of diversity.
Diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of
contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of feelings
gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives
rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to
diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of
passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.
Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of
gains.[2099](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2099){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2099
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What nine things should be produced?* Nine perceptions: the perceptions
of ugliness, death, repulsiveness in food, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self in
suffering, giving up, and fading
away.[2100](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2100){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2100
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What nine things should be directly known?* Nine progressive
meditations. A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption. Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension
of infinite space. Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space,
aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. Going totally beyond the dimension
of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they
enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. Going totally beyond
the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. Going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and
remain in the cessation of perception and feeling.

*What nine things should be realized?* Nine progressive cessations. For
someone who has attained the first absorption, sensual perceptions have
ceased. For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing
of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. For someone who has
attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased. For someone who has
attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased. For someone who
has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has
ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has
ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For
someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has
ceased. For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and
feeling, perception and feeling have ceased.

So these ninety things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 10. Groups of Ten {.subheading}

Ten things are helpful, ten things should be developed, ten things
should be completely understood, ten things should be given up, ten
things make things worse, ten things lead to distinction, ten things are
hard to comprehend, ten things should be produced, ten things should be
directly known, ten things should be realized.

*What ten things are helpful?* Ten qualities that serve as protector.
First, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is learned. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is energetic. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

*What ten things should be developed?* Ten universal dimensions of
meditation. Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above,
below, across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless.

*What ten things should be completely understood?* Ten sense fields: eye
and sights, ear and sounds, nose and smells, tongue and tastes, body and
touches.

*What ten things should be given up?* Ten wrong ways: wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.

*What ten things make things worse?* Ten ways of doing unskillful deeds:
killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and
wrong view.

*What ten things lead to distinction?* Ten ways of doing skillful deeds:
refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual
misconduct; avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view.

*What ten things are hard to comprehend?* Ten abodes of the noble ones.
A mendicant has given up five factors, possesses six factors, has a
single guard, has four supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has
unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well
freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? A mendicant, seeing a
sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous,
mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor
with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue ...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware. That's how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated,
thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.
That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when they've
given up sensual, malicious, and cruel intentions. That's how a
mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? Giving up pleasure
and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain
in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled the physical
process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.

*What ten things should be produced?* Ten perceptions: the perceptions
of ugliness, death, repulsiveness in food, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self in
suffering, giving up, fading away, and
cessation.[2101](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2101){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2101
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*What ten things should be directly known?* Ten grounds for wearing
away. For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. For
one of right intention, wrong intention is worn away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is worn away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is worn away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is worn away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
worn away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn
away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. ...
For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. ... For one of
right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful
qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away.

*What ten things should be realized?* Ten qualities of an adept: an
adept's right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right
freedom.[2102](#endnotes.xhtml_note-2102){#dn-pathikavagga.xhtml_noteref-2102
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So these hundred things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One." This is what
Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
Sāriputta said.

The Long Discourses are completed.

</article>

[]{#endnotes.xhtml}

::: {#endnotes.xhtml_endnotes .endnotes role="doc-endnotes"}
# Endnotes
:::

[]{#colophon.xhtml}

<article epub:type="colophon" id="colophon">

# Colophon

## The Translator

[Bhikkhu Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} was born as Anthony Aidan Best
on [4/11/1966]{.dc:date} in Perth, Western Australia. He grew up in the
pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and Attadale alongside his sister Nicola,
who was the good child. His mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née
Pinder, said "he'll either be a priest or a poet", while his father,
Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to "never do anything for money". He
attended Aquinas College, a Catholic school, where he decided to become
an atheist. At the University of WA he studied philosophy, aiming to
learn what he wanted to do with his life. Finding that what he wanted to
do was play guitar, he dropped out. His main band was named Martha's
Vineyard, which achieved modest success in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in 2018, and the
early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were complete by 2021. All this work
is dedicated to the public domain and is entirely free of copyright
encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

## Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the Pali Tipiṭaka.
Translated from the Pali, with reference to several English
translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi. Older translations by
Maurice Walshe and T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids were also consulted.

## The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable English; consistent
terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of copyright. It was
made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was staying in Qimei,
Taiwan.

## About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

## About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

## About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

</article>

[]{#imprint.xhtml}

:::::: {#imprint.xhtml_imprint .section .imprint}
`<cite property="dc:title">`{=html}Long Discourses`</cite>`{=html} is a
translation of the [Dīghanikāya]{property="dc:title"} by [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"}.

::: license
[Creative Commons Zero
([CC0]{.license-abbreviation})](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode){rel="license"
target="_blank"}

To the extent possible under law, [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} has waived all copyright and related or
neighboring rights to `<cite property="dct:title">`{=html}Long
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}.

This work is published from
[Australia]{about="https://suttacentral.net/licensing" content="AU"
datatype="dct:ISO3166" property="vcard:Country"}.

<aside class="license-statement">

This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.

</aside>
:::

::: {.text-metadata about="https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/master/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn"}
---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Web publication date   2018
  This edition           2024-10-21 01:30:28
  Publication type       epub
  Edition                ed2
  Number of volumes      1
  Publication ISBN       978-1-76132-048-4
  Publication URL        <https://suttacentral.net/editions/dn/en/sujato>
  Source URL             <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn>
  Publication number     scpub2
---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: publisher
Published by [SuttaCentral]{.publisher property="dc:publisher"}

<address>
SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia\
</address>
:::
::::::
