# The SuttaCentral Editions Series

Since 2005 SuttaCentral has provided access to the texts, translations,
and parallels of early Buddhist texts. In 2018 we started creating and
publishing our translations of these seminal spiritual classics. The
"Editions" series now makes selected translations available as books in
various forms, including print, PDF, and EPUB.

Editions are selected from our most complete, well-crafted, and reliable
translations. They aim to bring these texts to a wider audience in forms
that reward mindful reading. Care is taken with every detail of the
production, and we aim to meet or exceed professional best standards in
every way. These are the core scriptures underlying the entire Buddhist
tradition, and we believe that they deserve to be preserved and made
available in the highest quality without compromise.

SuttaCentral is a charitable organization. Our work is accomplished by
volunteers and through the generosity of our donors. Everything we
create is offered to all of humanity free of any copyright or licensing
restrictions.

# Preface to *Middle Discourses*

It was in 1992 that I first encountered the Buddha's words. I was in
Chieng Mai, having just completed my very first meditation retreat, a
month-long *vipassanā* intensive in the Mahasi style. During the
retreat, the guides at Wat Ram Poeng told us not to read any books, but
to learn only from our own experience. This was an entirely novel
concept for me at the time. The retreat, quite frankly, blew my mind.

When the retreat was over reading was allowed, and as a confirmed
bookworm from childhood, I couldn't wait to start making sense of all
that had happened on my retreat. They gave me some of the then-available
books, collections of Dhamma talks and the like. They were fine, but
nothing that really sparked my enthusiasm.

I went back and said, "They talk about these things called 'the Suttas'.
What are they?"

This was the days before the internet and before the excellent editions
by Bhikkhu Bodhi. What they had was the selected discourses from the
Majjhima Nikāya translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi, edited and compiled by
Bhikkhu Khantipalo as `<cite class="book">`{=html}A Treasury of the
Buddha's Words`</cite>`{=html}. Very excited, I took the first volume
back to my room and began to read.

Right away I knew. There was something about it. It was not at all what
I was expecting. I don't know what I was expecting, but this wasn't it.
It was so different than my usual reading. At once transparent and
obscure; forbidding and intimate. The Buddha's voice was refreshingly
free of the apologetics and mysticism I associated with "spiritual"
literature. He was direct, blunt even. He spoke with the quiet authority
of someone who knew what he was talking about.

I took it slow, reading a Sutta per day. There was much that I didn't
understand, even with the notes and introductions. But I knew that there
were great depths there. This was the Buddha! This would be just the
start of a long journey. So I read, slowly, going back over it again and
again, digesting as much as I could. When I had the time, I'd read for
an hour a day and meditate for a few hours. The teachers at Wat Ram
Poeng told us to sit mindfully when learning Dhamma, so I did. I brought
as much care and mindful attention to reading as I did to meditation.

Gradually I made my way through the Majjhima Nikāya, learning volumes
along the way. I remember some months after that retreat I was staying
in Mae Hong Son, at a farm for orphaned children called Buddhakaset. I
was there as a volunteer for a while. When the kids had gone to bed, I'd
sit in the evening under the shelter of a simple wooden verandah. I'd
carefully open my book of Suttas and read the next one, never quite
knowing what was to come. There are many things that most Buddhists will
encounter and know through Buddhist culture, then rediscover when
reading the Suttas. "Ahh, that's where that came from!" For me it was
the opposite: I discovered things in the Suttas, then noticed them in
Buddhist culture.

I continued these practices through my early years as a monk. Gradually,
I read my way through the Suttas, often in the archaic translations that
were then available. But I kept the simple approach I had from the
start. Read a bit, meditate a lot. Things that I read then have stayed
with me until the present.

I reread the Majjhima Nikāya in other translations. First that by I.B.
Horner for the Pali Text Society, which was roughly contemporary to that
of Ñāṇamoḷi, but which in publication and language seemed of an earlier
generation. Then Bhikkhu Bodhi's edition came out, a completely revised
and seemingly perfected translation based on that of Ñāṇamoḷi. Exciting
times! I was beginning my Pali studies, but I never expected to one day
be making my own translation.

I hope that you might experience something of the joy and inspiration
that I found in my discovery of the Suttas. At this point, having been a
monk for twenty-five years, it is redundant to say that these teachings
changed my life. They might change yours, too, if you let them.

</article>

[]{#introduction.xhtml}

<article class="introduction" id="introduction">

# The Middle Discourses: conversations on matters of deep truth

Bhikkhu Sujato, 2019

<nav class="contents">

1.  [How the Majjhima is Organized](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1)
2.  [Imagery and Narrative](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2)
3.  [Theory & Practice](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3)
4.  [The Buddha](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4)
5.  [The Stages of Awakening](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5)
6.  [The Monastic Disciples](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item6)
7.  [The Saṅgha](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item7)
8.  [The Wider Community](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item8)
9.  [A Brief Textual History](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item9)

</nav>

The Majjhima Nikāya is the second of the four main divisions in the
Sutta Piṭaka of the Pali Canon (*tipiṭaka*). It is translated here as
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Middle
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}, and is sometimes known as the
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Middle-Length
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}. As the title suggests, its discourses are
somewhat shorter than those of the Dīgha Nikāya
(`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Long
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}), but longer than the many short discourses
collected in the Saṁyutta Nikāya
(`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Linked
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}) and Aṅguttara Nikāya
(`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Numbered
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}).

In the classic introduction to his translation of the Majjhima Nikāya,
Bhikkhu Bodhi described the Majjhima as "the collection that combines
the richest variety of contextual settings with the deepest and most
comprehensive assortment of teachings". He went on to situate it among
the other *nikāyas*:

> Like the Dīgha Nikāya, the Majjhima is replete with drama and
> narrative, while lacking much of its predecessor's tendency towards
> imaginative embellishment and profusion of legend. Like the Saṁyutta,
> it contains some of the profoundest discourses in the Canon,
> disclosing the Buddha's radical insights into the nature of existence;
> and like the Aṅguttara, it covers a wide range of topics of practical
> applicability. In contrast to those two Nikāyas, however, the Majjhima
> sets forth this material not in the form of short, self-contained
> utterances, but in the context of a fascinating procession of
> scenarios that exhibit the Buddha's resplendence of wisdom, his skill
> in adapting his teachings to the needs and proclivities of his
> interlocutors, his wit and gentle humour, his majestic sublimity, and
> his compassionate humanity.

In this guide, I describe some of the special features of the Majjhima.
After noting some formal and doctrinal features, I focus this essay on
the Buddha and the people he encountered, whether his monastic Sangha,
his lay followers, or the many non-Buddhists he spoke with. The Majjhima
includes many of the most important autobiographical discourses, so it
is a natural place to discuss the Buddha's life and person. And the
dialogue format makes the Majjhima a specially rich context to see how
the Dhamma emerged through interaction and conversation with people of
all kinds.

## How the Majjhima is Organized {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1}

There are 152 discourses in the Majjhima. These are collected into
groups of 50 discourses (*paṇṇāsa*), although the final *paṇṇāsa*
contains 52.

Within each *paṇṇāsa* is a set of five *vaggas*. As usual, most of the
*vaggas* are simply named after their first sutta, but a few exhibit
some thematic unity:

**Opamma Vagga (Chapter With Similes)**
:   All these discourses prominently feature similes.

**Mahāyamaka Vagga (Large Chapter With Pairs)**
:   Paired "long" and "short" discourses. (The following Short Chapter
    With Pairs only has two sets of pairs.)

**Vaggas 6--10**
:   These collect discourses featuring certain kinds of people:
    householders, mendicants, wanderers, kings, and brahmins.

**Vibhaṅga Vagga (Chapter on Analysis)**
:   These discourses consist of a lengthy "analysis" of a short saying.

**Saḷāyatana Vagga (Chapter on the Six Senses)**
:   These focus on the six senses.

## Imagery and Narrative {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2}

The Majjhima includes an astonishing range of imagery, with similes
found in almost all discourses. Sometimes these are extended to short
parables. [MN 21](https://suttacentral.net/mn21){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Simile of the
Saw`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Kakacūpamasutta`</cite>`{=html}) tells
the memorable story of the bold maid Kāḷī who tested her mistress. In
[MN 56:27](https://suttacentral.net/mn56#27){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Upāli`</cite>`{=html} we
meet the brahmin lady who wanted to not only dye her pet monkey, but
press him and wring him out.

While the Buddha himself speaks only short tales, in the background
narratives we find more developed narratives, including famous stories
such as the taming of the vicious serial-killer Aṅgulimāla ([MN
86](https://suttacentral.net/mn86){.ref}) or the uncompromising
commitment of the wealthy youth Raṭṭhapāla ([MN
82](https://suttacentral.net/mn82){.ref}), who defied his parents' will
to take ordination, and whose discourse finishes with an extraordinary
set of teachings for his king.

Some stories are less earthbound. [MN
37](https://suttacentral.net/mn37){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter Discourse on the
Ending of Craving`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷataṇhāsaṅkhayasutta`</cite>`{=html})
depicts Moggallāna ascending to the heaven of Sakka, the lord of gods,
to check his indulgence. [MN 50](https://suttacentral.net/mn50){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Rebuke of
Māra`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Māratajjanīyasutta`</cite>`{=html})
also features Moggallāna, this time in a dialogue with Māra, the lord of
deceit and death; and it contains the startling revelation that
Moggallāna himself was a Māra in a past life. Such cosmic drama reaches
its apex in [MN 49](https://suttacentral.net/mn49){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}On the Invitation of
Brahmā`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Brahmanimantanikasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
where the Buddha takes on no less than Brahmā himself in a high-level
philosophical debate, forcing Māra to reveal himself on the side of
Brahmā. From the perspective of early Buddhism, God and the Devil are
not so very different.

## Theory & Practice {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3}

The Majjhima is perhaps the richest of the early Buddhist collections in
matters of doctrine. It contains an extraordinary series of discourses
that delve into profound topics with detail and complexity not found
elsewhere. It's worth bearing in mind, though, that such discourses are
for advanced students, and fascinating as they are, it is important to
get a solid grounding on the fundamental doctrines collected in the
Saṁyutta. For this reason, I reserve most doctrinal explanations for my
guide to the Linked Discourses and make only a few brief remarks here.

The teachings familiar from the Saṁyutta are all found in the Majjhima,
and in several cases, the Majjhima offers more detailed explanations.
These discourses are important and deserve close study, but beware of
equating length with importance. In Buddhist texts it's just as likely
that length implies, not that it is something the Buddha regarded as
important, but that it is a late compilation.

Such is the case with [MN 10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Mindfulness
Meditation`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Satipaṭṭhānasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
which, together with its expanded version at [DN
22](https://suttacentral.net/dn22){.ref}, is the most detailed
explanation of mindfulness meditation in the canon. Yet critical and
comparative analysis reveals that the discourse as found in the Pali has
been subject to considerable late development. [MN
141](https://suttacentral.net/mn141){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Analysis of the
Truths`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Saccavibhaṅgasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
the most detailed discourse of the four noble truths, is closely related
to [MN 10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}---in fact [DN
22](https://suttacentral.net/dn22){.ref} is virtually a combination of
this and [MN 10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}---and it too might
be suspected to have late features. No such doubt attends to [MN
111](https://suttacentral.net/mn111){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}One by One`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Anupadasutta`</cite>`{=html}), which
is clearly a late sutta. This is not the place for a complex discussion
of text-critical method, but it is common and natural to assume that
length implies importance, and it is worth bearing in mind that the
situation is more complicated than that.

Majjhima suttas that deal with key doctrinal teachings can be understood
as offering in-depth analyses of particular factors of the four noble
truths. The first truth of suffering is explored in detail in [MN
13](https://suttacentral.net/mn13){.ref} and [MN
14](https://suttacentral.net/mn14){.ref} on the "Mass of Suffering".
Various topics under this heading are also treated in detail; the six
sense fields are taught in several suttas ([MN
18](https://suttacentral.net/mn18){.ref}, [MN
137](https://suttacentral.net/mn137){.ref}, [MN
138](https://suttacentral.net/mn138){.ref}) and even an entire *vagga*
([MN 143](https://suttacentral.net/mn143){.ref}--152), while several
suttas investigate the teaching on the elements in great detail,
exposing depths that one might not suspect for what appears to be such a
simple teaching ([MN 28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28){.ref}, [MN
115](https://suttacentral.net/mn115){.ref}, [MN
140](https://suttacentral.net/mn140){.ref}). The aggregates appear, but
are treated in less detail.

The second and third noble truths are featured in [MN
38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38){.ref}, a complex and rewarding
discourse on dependent origination, as well as [MN
135](https://suttacentral.net/mn135){.ref} and [MN
136](https://suttacentral.net/mn136){.ref}, two of the most detailed and
influential discourses on the topic of *kamma*; see too [MN
120](https://suttacentral.net/mn120){.ref}.

But it is the fourth noble truth, the path, that dominates the Majjhima.
The vast majority of discourses deal with the path as a central topic.
The noble eightfold path is treated in complex detail at [MN
117](https://suttacentral.net/mn117){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great Forty`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahācattārīsakasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
and several discourses deal with specific path factors. In [MN
9](https://suttacentral.net/mn9){.ref}, Venerable Sāriputta presents the
topic of right view from a diverse range of perspectives. The second
path factor, right thought or right intention, is the special subject of
[MN 19](https://suttacentral.net/mn19){.ref} and [MN
20](https://suttacentral.net/mn20){.ref}, which give advice from the
Buddha's own experience on how to first purify thought and then let it
go entirely. The path factors on ethics are treated in too many suttas
to be summarized here; some of these are covered in the sections on the
Saṅgha and the lay communities. Right effort is featured in many suttas
but is especially emphasized in texts such as [MN
29](https://suttacentral.net/mn29){.ref}, [MN
30](https://suttacentral.net/mn30){.ref}, and [MN
32](https://suttacentral.net/mn32){.ref}. [MN
10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){.ref}, as noted, deals with right
mindfulness, and the topic is treated from more specialized angles in
[MN 118](https://suttacentral.net/mn118){.ref} on mindfulness of
breathing, and [MN 119](https://suttacentral.net/mn119){.ref} on
mindfulness of the body. In [MN 77](https://suttacentral.net/mn77){.ref}
we find a long list of different presentations of the path, including
the topics found as heads in the Saṁyutta, and quite a few more.

Right immersion or *jhāna*, the final factor of the path, is prominent
throughout the Majjhima. It is difficult to overstate how central the
*jhānas* are to Buddhist meditation. The formula for the four
absorptions appears around 50 times in the Majjhima, which is probably
more than the formulas for all the other path factors *combined*.
Moreover, right immersion appears also in other guises, such as the four
"divine meditations" (*brahmavihāra*), where the pure emotions of love,
compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity serve as a basis for immersion.
These appear around 13 times in the Majjhima. The even more subtle
"formless" meditations are also a frequent topic, also appearing no less
than 13 times. Unlike the absorptions, these are not an absolute
requirement for the path to awakening, but clearly they were part of the
practice for many talented meditators. Discourses such as [MN
52](https://suttacentral.net/mn52){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Man From the City of
Aṭṭhaka`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Aṭṭhakanāgarasutta`</cite>`{=html})
combine these three sets of meditations, while advanced texts such as
[MN 43](https://suttacentral.net/mn43){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Great
Classification`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāvedallasutta`</cite>`{=html}), [MN
44](https://suttacentral.net/mn44){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter
Classification`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷavedallasutta`</cite>`{=html}), [MN
106](https://suttacentral.net/mn106){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Āneñjasappāyasutta`</cite>`{=html}, [MN
121](https://suttacentral.net/mn121){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter Discourse on
Emptiness`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷasuññatasutta`</cite>`{=html}), and
[MN 122](https://suttacentral.net/mn122){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse on
Emptiness`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāsuññatasutta`</cite>`{=html}) deal
with rarely-discussed subtleties and refinements pertaining to the most
advanced forms of meditation.

## The Buddha {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4}

The story of the Buddha's life has become a primary vehicle for sharing
and passing down Buddhist teachings and values in the Buddhist
traditions. Yet there is no coherent biography of the Buddha in the
early texts. Such information as we do have is scattered and piecemeal,
found in the occasional details shared by the Buddha himself or inferred
from the various situations in which we find him.

But perhaps this shouldn't come as such a surprise. There's no
particular reason for the Buddha to be interested in telling his life
story---he had lived it. And his disciples knew him personally. Only
after he had passed away did the community feel the need to keep their
teacher's memory alive through vivid and detailed stories, growing more
elaborate with every telling.

The broad outlines of the later Buddha legends grew out of the kernels
in the early texts, many of which are found in the Majjhima. There we
find the Buddha's birth, his early upbringing, renunciation, practice
and awakening, challenges involved in setting up a community, and
various encounters while teaching. In the Dīgha we find the longest
narrative of early Buddhism, an extensive record of the Buddha's last
days found in [DN 16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāparinibbāna`</cite>`{=html}. And
scattered throughout the texts we find isolated events and encounters.
In one sense, most of the discourses can be considered as episodes of
the Buddha's life, vignettes in a magnificent myth, each one
contributing a little to understanding the man and his message. These
texts form our primary source of knowledge for the Buddha's early life
and teaching career. While the tendency towards legend-building is
apparent in some places, most of these episodes are simple and
realistic.

An exception is [MN 123](https://suttacentral.net/mn123){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Incredible and
Amazing`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Acchariyaabbhutasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
where we find Ānanda, the founder of Buddhist biography, recounting an
extended series of apparently miraculous events that accompanied the
birth of the Buddha-to-be. This is evidently derived from [DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpadāna`</cite>`{=html} with some
expansions. With its devotional tone and emphasis on the extraordinary,
this text shows a shift in emphasis towards honoring the person of the
Buddha rather than practicing his teachings; a shift that the Buddha
resists by pointing out that the truly extraordinary thing is to be
aware of one's own mind.

The Buddha's immediate family is mentioned only rarely in the *nikāyas*.
The Buddha's wife appears only in the Vinaya and Therīgāthā, where she
has some verses. His son Rāhula is prominently featured in several
discourses ([MN 61](https://suttacentral.net/mn61){.ref}, [MN
62](https://suttacentral.net/mn62){.ref}, [MN
147](https://suttacentral.net/mn147){.ref}), showing the Buddha's
patient teaching and Rāhula's eventual awakening. The Buddha's father is
briefly mentioned in the passage below on meditation as a child. Both
his parents are mentioned in several Majjhima discourses ([MN
26](https://suttacentral.net/mn26){.ref}, [MN
36](https://suttacentral.net/mn36){.ref}, [MN
85](https://suttacentral.net/mn85){.ref}, [MN
100](https://suttacentral.net/mn100){.ref}), but they are only named
elsewhere: Suddhodana his father in [Snp
3.11](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11){.ref} and [Kd
1:54](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1.#54){.ref}; Māyā his mother in
[Thig 6.6](https://suttacentral.net/thig6.6){.ref}; and both in [DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref} and [Thag
10.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag10.1){.ref}. His stepmother
Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, however, appears in a few discourses, notably [MN
142](https://suttacentral.net/mn142){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Analysis of Religious
Donations`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
and [AN 8.51](https://suttacentral.net/an8.51){.ref}. More distant
relatives include several well-known monastic and lay figures such as
Ānanda, Anuruddha, and Mahānāma.

In [MN 75:10](https://suttacentral.net/mn75#10){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Māgaṇḍiya`</cite>`{=html}
the Buddha recounts the luxuries he enjoyed as a young man (cp. [AN
3.39](https://suttacentral.net/an3.39){.ref}), and in [MN
26:13](https://suttacentral.net/mn26#13){.ref} he tells of the painful
moment when he left home, though his parents wept in distress. An
alternate account of the going forth is found in the distinctive and
early Attadaṇḍa Sutta, where going forth is prompted not by the sight of
old age, sickness, and death, but by seeing the unceasing conflict and
distress of the world ([Snp
4.15](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.15){.ref}).

There follows the story of the six years of striving, divided into three
periods. It seems that he first practiced under a Brahmanical tradition,
probably following the Upaniṣadic philosophy. [MN
26](https://suttacentral.net/mn26){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Noble Search`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Ariyapariyesanasutta`</cite>`{=html},
also known as the
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Pāsarāsisutta`</cite>`{=html}) tells of
his experience under the famed spiritual guides Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka
Rāmaputta. Under their tutelage, he realized deep immersion (*samādhi*)
and formless attainments, but he was still unsatisfied, so he left to
embark on a more severe ascetic path.

According to the traditions, the bulk of this period was spent enduring
harsh austerities, practices that are similar or identical to those
observed by the Jains. These are described in detail in [MN
12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse on the
Lion's Roar`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāsīhanādasutta`</cite>`{=html}) and
[MN 36](https://suttacentral.net/mn36){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse With
Saccaka`</cite>`{=html}. But after many years of such
self-mortification, he was getting nowhere. So he took some solid food
and, recalling his childhood experience of absorption, began the third
and final phase of his practice, which led to his awakening.

While it might seem as if the night of awakening followed directly from
his rejection of austerities, several discourses indicate that this
period involved a rather extensive development of meditation. [MN
19](https://suttacentral.net/mn19){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Two Kinds of
Thought`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Dvedhāvitakkasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
for example, tells of his analysis and training in wholesome thought;
[MN 4](https://suttacentral.net/mn4){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Fear and Terror`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Bhayabheravasutta`</cite>`{=html})
depicts his struggles to overcome fear; and [MN
128](https://suttacentral.net/mn128){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Corruptions`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Upakkilesasutta`</cite>`{=html})
speaks of a series of specific meditative hindrances he encountered (see
too [AN 8.64](https://suttacentral.net/an8.64){.ref} and [AN
9.40](https://suttacentral.net/an9.40){.ref}). While his reflections on
pursuing a path of practice are always logical, in [AN
5.196](https://suttacentral.net/an5.196){.ref} we read about an
extraordinary series of dreams that foretold his awakening; the
symbolism of the dream imagery repays careful attention.

It is in the Majjhima ([MN 36](https://suttacentral.net/mn36){.ref}, [MN
85](https://suttacentral.net/mn85){.ref}, [MN
100](https://suttacentral.net/mn100){.ref}) that the Buddha speaks of
that crucial moment in his childhood where he spontaneously entered the
first absorption, a state of profound peace and stillness in meditation.
Much later, when he arrived at a crisis in his spiritual progress, he
was to recall this event and realize that meditative absorption was the
only true path to awakening (*eso'va maggo bodhāya*).

The Buddha's awakening is told from several different perspectives. In
[MN 4](https://suttacentral.net/mn4){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Bhayabherava`</cite>`{=html}, after
describing how he overcame his fears, the Buddha tells how he developed
the absorptions and gained the three higher knowledges. In [MN
14](https://suttacentral.net/mn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter Discourse on the Mass
of Suffering`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷadukkhakkhandha`</cite>`{=html}) he
speaks of the escape from suffering by letting go of sensual pleasures;
see too [SN 35.117](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.117){.ref}. Several
discourses employ the stock framework of understanding the three aspects
of gratification, drawback, and escape, applying this to the five
aggregates ([SN 22.26](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.26){.ref}), the
elements ([SN 14.31](https://suttacentral.net/sn14.31){.ref}), feelings
([SN 36.24](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.24){.ref}), or the world ([AN
3.101](https://suttacentral.net/an3.101){.ref}). Elsewhere awakening is
seen as a result of understanding dependent origination ([SN
12.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.10){.ref}, [DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}). Other contexts depict
awakening as emerging from different practices, such as the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation ([SN
47.31](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.31){.ref}), the four bases of
psychic powers ([SN 51.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn51.9){.ref}), or
the abandoning of thoughts ([MN
19](https://suttacentral.net/mn19){.ref}). This is far from an
exhaustive list, as all of the Buddha\'s teachings depict different
aspects of the wisdom that stems from awakening.

The period after the awakening is told in some detail, recounting the
Buddha's journeys, various encounters along the way, his first
conversions, and setting up the Sangha. However the detailed account of
this is in the Vinaya ([Kd
1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1){.ref}), and only portions of
these events are found in the *nikāyas*, such as the first three sermons
([SN 56.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11){.ref}, [SN
22.59](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.59){.ref}, [SN
35.28](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.28){.ref}).

The Buddha followed the same simple lifestyle as his monastic disciples.
His possessions consisted of a single set of three robes, a bowl, and a
few other sundry items. He stayed for the most part in Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery near Sāvatthī, although he spent time also in other
monasteries. While in a monastery he lived in a simple hut. The year was
divided into three seasons---hot, rainy, and cold. During the rainy
season he always stayed in a monastery, while for the other seasons he
might also wander the countryside.

A typical day would begin with early rising for meditation. The
approaching dawn signaled the start of the day's activities,
particularly the daily alms round. Now, while in the monastery,
monastics would typically wear only a lower sarong-like robe (and an
upper cloth for the nuns). So, some time after dawn, they would dress in
the full set of three robes before proceeding to a nearby village or
town for alms round. During the alms round, as may be seen in Buddhist
lands today, lay folk would put some food in the bowl to be eaten that
day. Buddhist monastics are not allowed to receive money. The monastics
would eat once or twice a day, but always between dawn and noon.

Normally the mendicants would retire after the morning meal to solitude
for the day's meditation, either in their huts or perhaps in a nearby
forest or some other quiet spot. In the hot season the Buddha would
sometimes have a short siesta in the afternoon ([MN
36:46](https://suttacentral.net/mn36#46){.ref}). Towards evening the
Buddha would emerge and would often give teachings or answer questions.
But this was spontaneous, and not a fixed routine. Then he would
meditate until late at night, needing only a few hours sleep in the
middle of the night.

[MN 91](https://suttacentral.net/mn91){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Brahmāyu`</cite>`{=html}
describes his behavior in minute detail, recording the tiny nuances of
mindfulness and care that he brought to every activity. His followers
saw him as the embodiment of the highest truth. Discerning his
realization in every detail of his words and acts, they could be moved
to exalted praise in passages of joy and high beauty ([MN
92](https://suttacentral.net/mn92){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Sela`</cite>`{=html}, [AN
6.43](https://suttacentral.net/an6.43){.ref}, [AN
10.30](https://suttacentral.net/an10.30){.ref}, [SN
8.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn8.7){.ref}). However, far from
encouraging mindless devotion, the Buddha encouraged his students to
investigate him, prescribing a rigorous and detailed set of tests that a
good spiritual teacher should pass ([MN
47](https://suttacentral.net/mn47){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Inquirer`</cite>`{=html}).

This brief description does not do justice to the impact that the Buddha
had on those who encountered him. He is constantly praised as the one
who arises in the world out of compassion for sentient beings ([MN
4](https://suttacentral.net/mn4){.ref}), who is perfected in good
qualities ([MN 38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38){.ref}), whose arising
is the manifestation of a great light ([AN
1.175](https://suttacentral.net/an1.175){.ref}--[AN
1.177](https://suttacentral.net/an1.177){.ref}), who fully understands
whatever is knowable ([MN 1](https://suttacentral.net/mn1){.ref}; [AN
4.23](https://suttacentral.net/an4.23){.ref}), and possesses complete
confidence and courage no matter what the context ([MN
12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12){.ref}). He possessed overwhelming
physical beauty and charisma, making an unforgettable impression on many
of the people he encountered ([MN
26](https://suttacentral.net/mn26){.ref}, [AN
4.36](https://suttacentral.net/an4.36){.ref}), but he told overzealous
devotees to forget about his "putrid body" ([SN
22.87](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.87){.ref}).

While as a person he was unique and unequaled in his time ([MN
56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56){.ref}; [AN
1.174](https://suttacentral.net/an1.174){.ref}), as the "Realized One"
(*tathāgatha*) the Buddha was one of a series of awakened masters of
truly cosmic significance. His understanding did not just pertain to the
narrow locale of his own time and place, but was equally relevant to all
sentient beings in all realms at all times.

Other Buddhas have arisen in the past and will arise again in the
future, with the same realization and teachings. A detailed list of past
Buddhas is found at [DN 14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpadāna`</cite>`{=html}. Mentions
elsewhere, such as the Buddhas Kakusandha in [MN
50](https://suttacentral.net/mn50){.ref} and Kassapa in [MN
81](https://suttacentral.net/mn81){.ref}, show that the underlying idea
was current throughout the *nikāyas* (See too [SN
12.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.14){.ref}--10, [AN
3.80](https://suttacentral.net/an3.80){.ref}, and [AN
5.180](https://suttacentral.net/an5.180){.ref}).

[MN 116](https://suttacentral.net/mn116){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}At Isigili`</cite>`{=html} also
refers to the so-called "Buddhas awakened for themselves"
(*paccekabuddha*), a mysterious kind of sage who has realized the same
truths as the "fully awakened Buddha" (*sammāsambuddha*) but does not
establish a religious movement.

Despite his exalted and revered status, the Buddha in the *nikāyas* had
not yet been elevated to the cosmic divinity who appears in later
Buddhism. For all his extraordinary qualities, he remains a very human
figure. Nowhere does he say that his practice in past lives led to his
awakening in this life; there is no mention of the *pāramīs*. Indeed, in
one of the rare occasions when he refers to a past life ([MN
81](https://suttacentral.net/mn81){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Ghaṭikāra`</cite>`{=html}),
he appears decidedly un-enlightened.

In the early texts, the term *bodhisatta* means "one intent on
awakening". It primarily refers to the period after leaving home and
before awakening. The Buddha-to-be is not described as following a path
that he had started long ago, but as exploring the different options
available to him, uncertain as to how awakening may be gained. His
crucial insight came, not through vows made in past lives, but when he
remembered the time he fell into absorption (*jhāna*) as a child.

The Buddha goes to great lengths to detail the many trials and
experiments he undertook before his path was mature. His truly special
quality was that he discovered the path through his own efforts, and
later taught that same path to his disciples. Even disciples who had
realized the same liberation and understanding revered the Buddha as the
one of unsurpassed wisdom and compassion who illuminated the path for
others.

## The Stages of Awakening {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5}

Spiritual enlightenment or awakening in Buddhism is not seen as a vague
or unknown quantity. On the contrary, it is specific, precise, and
repeatable. The texts develop a detailed typology of enlightened beings.
There are four main stages, subdivided into eight. These are called the
"noble disciples" (*ariyasāvaka*) or "good people" (*sappurisa*). These
are presented from different perspectives throughout the texts; here is
an overview.

The factors of the path are developed until they are all present to a
sufficient degree of maturity. At this point one is said to be a
"follower of the teachings" (*dhammānusāri*) or "follower by faith"
(*saddhānusāri*), depending on whether wisdom or faith is predominant
([MN 70:20](https://suttacentral.net/mn70#20){.ref}). Such a person is
also called "one who is on the path to stream-entry" ([MN
142:5](https://suttacentral.net/mn142#5){.ref}, [MN
48:15](https://suttacentral.net/mn48#15){.ref}). They will realize the
Dhamma in this life, yet they have still not seen a vision of the Dhamma
and their understanding is still to a degree conceptual ([SN
25.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn25.1){.ref}). How far and fast they
proceed depends on the strength of their faculties and their effort.

The texts are unclear as to whether such a person definitively knows
that they have reached this point. No such ambiguity attaches to the
moment of actually realizing stream-entry, however. It hits like a flash
of lightning in the dead of night ([AN
3.25](https://suttacentral.net/an3.25){.ref}), and you will remember
precisely when and where it happened ([Pj
4](https://suttacentral.net/pj4){.ref}). You have a vision of the four
noble truths, at which point the conceptual understanding of the path
becomes fully experiential ([SN
25.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn25.1){.ref}). Letting go of three
fetters (*saṁyojana*)---doubt, misapprehension of precepts and vows, and
any views that identify a self with the aggregates---one reaches the
first stage of awakening, known as "stream entry".

A stream-enterer is bound for awakening, free from any rebirth in lower
realms ([MN 6](https://suttacentral.net/mn6){.ref}; [SN
55.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.1){.ref}), and is reborn a maximum
of seven times ([AN 3.88](https://suttacentral.net/an3.88){.ref}). They
have eliminated a huge mass of suffering; what's left is like seven
small pebbles compared to the Himalayas ([SN
56.59](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.59){.ref}). They are generous,
devoted, and naturally keep the five precepts at a minimum ([MN
53](https://suttacentral.net/mn53){.ref}; [SN
12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41){.ref}; [AN
7.6](https://suttacentral.net/an7.6){.ref}). They understand the four
noble truths and dependent origination and have no doubts as to the
Buddha, his teaching, or his Saṅgha ([MN
7](https://suttacentral.net/mn7){.ref}; [SN
12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41){.ref}). Yet there are still
attachments; one may still sorrow when relatives pass away ([Ud
8.8](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.8){.ref}), or suffer moments of grief
or despair ([DN
16:5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5){.ref}.13).

When a stream-enterer further develops the path, they are said to be on
the path to once-return; with the lessening of greed and hate they reach
the state of a once-returner. At this point one will be reborn in this
world once only. Again developing the path one completely eliminates
greed and hate, at which point one is considered a non-returner. Such a
person is reborn usually in one of the special realms of high divinity
known as the Pure Abodes, and from there attains full extinguishment.
However, in certain cases a non-returner may become fully extinguished
before being reborn ([AN 3.88](https://suttacentral.net/an3.88){.ref}).

Yet even the exalted state of the non-returner is not entirely free from
attachments. They have perfected ethics and immersion, yet their wisdom
is still not complete. They still have the five higher fetters:
attachment to rebirth in the realms of luminous form and the formless; a
restless urgency to reach full awakening; a residual sense of self, or
conceit; and ignorance.

Once again they further develop the path until they attain full
perfection. A perfected one, or arahant, has fully eliminated all
defilements, has made an end of rebirth, and when this life is over will
suffer no more. Their liberation is identical to that of the Buddha.
Since they have no hindrances or defilements of mind, they can attain
deep meditation whenever they want, and their lives are full of joy and
peace. They feel no grief, no anxiety, no confusion or doubt. A
perfected one lives only in accordance with the Dhamma, and is incapable
of reverting to worldly ways, or of indulging in material desires. They
live a life of serenity and virtue, preferring seclusion and meditation,
but are selfless in service, helping others whenever they can,
especially through teaching. They are devoid of fear and have complete
equanimity when faced with death ([MN
140:24](https://suttacentral.net/mn140#24){.ref}). They still experience
the pain of the body, but have no mental suffering at all ([SN
36.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.6){.ref}).

## The Monastic Disciples {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item6}

Although we think of the suttas as "teachings of the Buddha", in fact
only about a quarter of the discourses in the Majjhima feature the
Buddha simply delivering a discourse to the assembly. Over half the
discourses consist of dialogues (*vyākaraṇa*). Sometimes the Buddha asks
a question and leads the assembly through a process of Socratic inquiry.
Sometimes a seeker asks a question or a series of questions. The Buddha
may answer in various ways---sometimes directly, sometimes with a
counter-question, sometimes with a lengthy analysis---depending on the
nature of the question and the questioner. And intriguingly, he
sometimes doesn't answer at all.

And as well as featuring in one way or another in most of the
discourses, various disciples serve as primary teachers in about a fifth
of the discourses of the Majjhima, continuing the Buddha's work of
exploring and explaining the teachings. In the Majjhima Nikāya we meet a
range of skilled and accomplished teachers, many of whom became widely
famed in the Buddhist traditions. From the beginning of his
dispensation, the Buddha was eager to empower his followers, encouraging
them to share the teaching to the best of their ability.

Nine discourses are spoken by the Buddha's chief disciple and renowned
General of the Dhamma, Sāriputta. These include [MN
9](https://suttacentral.net/mn9){.ref}, a wide-ranging exploration of
the many facets of right view; [MN
28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28){.ref}, which shows how all the
teachings can be included in the four noble truths; and [MN
141](https://suttacentral.net/mn141){.ref}, giving a fully detailed
explanation of the four noble truths based on the Buddha's first sermon.
In these discourses Sāriputta shows his interest in developing a
systematic overview of the Dhamma. Such analyses are one of the primary
inspirations behind the later development of the Abhidhamma texts, and
Sāriputta is rightly regarded as one of the fathers of the Abhidhamma.

Mahākaccāna is another monk of renowned wisdom, whose incisive analytic
style, with a special focus on the process of sense experience, also
influenced the Abhidhamma. He spoke four discourses in the Majjhima. [MN
18](https://suttacentral.net/mn18){.ref}, the "Honey Cake" demonstrates
his unmatched skill in drawing out subtle implications of brief
teachings by the Buddha. This discourse received a detailed treatment in
Katukurunde Nyanananda's `<cite class="book">`{=html}Concept and Reality
in Early Buddhist Thought`</cite>`{=html}, one of the most influential
monographs in modern Buddhist studies.

[MN 24](https://suttacentral.net/mn24){.ref}, a dialogue between
Sāriputta and Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, speaks of a relay of chariots,
introducing the idea of the seven stages of purification that was to
greatly influence the concept of stages of insight in Buddhaghosa's
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Visuddhimagga`</cite>`{=html} and, from
there, contemporary Theravada meditation.

The nun Dhammadinnā presents the only discourse by a *bhikkhunī* in the
Majjhima. It seems that the teachings by women in the suttas, while
rare, were included because of their unique and striking wisdom. In [MN
44](https://suttacentral.net/mn44){.ref} she responds to a series of
questions by her former husband, revealing her depth of meditative
accomplishment and wisdom.

Further discourses by disciples include several by Moggallāna,
Anuruddha, and others. And we cannot pass a discussion on disciples
without mentioning Ānanda, who lived closest to the Buddha, and through
whom, according to tradition, all the texts passed. Ānanda is the main
teacher in seven discourses, and features in many more. Ānanda has a
specially close interest in the personal life of the Buddha, and it is
with him that the Buddha's life story began to take on its familiar
form.

## The Saṅgha {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item7}

Mighty in wisdom though they were, the enlightened disciples of the
Buddha did not exist in isolation. They were part of an organized
spiritual community called the Saṅgha, or "Monastic Order". *Saṅgha* as
a religious term is used in two specific senses: the "monastic order"
(*bhikkhusaṅgha*) and the "community of noble disciples"
(*sāvakasaṅgha*; the expected term *ariyasaṅgha* only appears in one
verse at [AN 6.54](https://suttacentral.net/an6.54){.ref}). The former
term refers to those who have taken ordination and practice as a
Buddhist mendicant, while the latter refers to someone who has reached
one of the stages of awakening, which may, of course, include lay
followers.

The distinction between these two is not as clear-cut as one might
imagine. The standard formula describing the Saṅgha in the recollection
of the Triple Gem mentions the eight kinds of noble disciple on the
path. But it also describes them in terms typical of the monastic order,
for example as a "field of merit". It is difficult to draw a decisive
conclusion from this, however, as this formula appears to be a composite
one. As a general rule, it is safe to assume that, unless the context
specifies the Saṅgha of noble disciples, it is referring to the monastic
order.

The monastic community was established shortly after the Buddha's
awakening, as told in the first chapter of the Vinaya Khandhakas, known
as the Mahākkhandhaka or the Pabbajjakkhandhaka ([Kd
1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1){.ref}). Portions of that
narrative appear in the suttas, but the entire story should really be
read.

The early Saṅgha consisted of a small community of advanced spiritual
practitioners; according to the texts, they were all perfected ones.
Famously, the Buddha urged his followers to wander the countryside,
teaching the Dhamma for the benefit of all people ([SN
4.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.5){.ref}). This sets the example for
how the Buddha was to relate to his community. He did not operate as a
guru figure who insisted on obedience and treated his followers as
dependents. On the contrary, he treated his community as adults who
could make their own choices, and he trusted them to make their own
contributions. To be sure, at this early stage they were all awakened;
but this policy continued throughout his life, even up to his deathbed
when this had long ceased to be the case.

[Kd 1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1){.ref} tells the story of how
the ordination procedure evolved. Originally the Buddha himself simply
invited his followers with the words "Come, mendicant!" Later, as the
number of candidates grew, the Buddha allowed the mendicants to perform
ordination themselves using a simple ceremony of going to the three
refuges; this is still used for novice ordinations. Eventually, the
procedure was formalized in the mature form as a "motion and three
announcements". The mature form of ordination ceremony had various
formal and legalistic elements: a set of questions was given to vet the
candidates; the questioners were formally appointed by the Saṅgha; the
candidates, having been questioned, were assigned a mentor; and the
entire Saṅgha gave their assent to the ordination. The entire procedure
is straightforward and legalistic, devoid of ritual or embellishment.
The core of the procedure is still followed today, although the
traditions have adorned the bare bones of the procedure with a colorful
range of rituals and celebrations.

This procedure set the template for the proceedings of the Sangha. It is
by consensus: the Saṅgha as a whole gives the ordination (*saṁgho
itthannāmaṁ upasampādeti*). If even a single mendicant dissents the
ordination does not proceed. Contrary to a misunderstanding that is
unfortunately common even within the Saṅgha, the mentor---called
*upajjhāya* for the monks or *pavattinī* for the nuns---does not perform
the ordination; they are appointed by the Saṅgha to support the new
monastics.

For legal purposes the Saṅgha is the community within the "boundary"
(*sīmā*), which is an arbitrary area formally designated by the local
community; typically it would have been the grounds of a monastery, but
it could have been much bigger or smaller (see [Kd
2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd2){.ref}). This is an important
pragmatic point: the Saṅgha is decentralized. It is impractical to
expect all mendicants from all over the world to come together to agree,
so all procedures are based on the local community.

There is no hierarchy in the Saṅgha: all members have the same say.
Respect is owed to seniors on account of their experience and wisdom,
but this does not translate to a power of command. No Saṅgha member has
the right to force anyone to do anything, and if a senior Saṅgha member,
even one's mentor or teacher, tells one to do something that is against
the Dhamma or Vinaya, one is obligated to disobey. As an example of how
the mendicants were to make decisions, [MN
17](https://suttacentral.net/mn17){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Jungle Thickets`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Vanapatthasutta`</cite>`{=html}) gives
some guidelines for whether a mendicant should stay in a monastery or
leave; there is no question of being ordered to go to one place or the
other.

The Saṅgha soon set up monasteries, with relatively settled communities.
Typically mendicants would stay in monasteries for part of the year,
especially in the three months of the rainy season retreat, while much
of the rest of the year may have been spent wandering. They would meet
together each fortnight for the "sabbath" (*uposatha*), during which
time there would be teachings ([MN
109](https://suttacentral.net/mn109){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse on the
Full-Moon Night`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Mahāpuṇṇamasutta`</cite>`{=html}), and
later, the recitation of the monastic rules (*pātimokkha*).

At some point a community of nuns (*bhikkhunīs*) was set up along the
lines of the monks' order. The traditional account says that this was on
the instigation of the Buddha's stepmother, Mahapajāpatī Gotamī.
However, the account as preserved today is deeply problematic both
textually and ethically, and cannot be accepted without reservation. In
any case, we know that a nuns' community was established and that it ran
on mostly independent grounds. The nuns built their own monasteries ([Bi
Pj 5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pj5){.ref}), took their own
students ([Thig 5.11](https://suttacentral.net/thig5.11){.ref}), studied
the texts ([Bi Pc
33](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pc-33){.ref}), developed
meditation ([SN 47.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.10){.ref}),
wandered the countryside ([Bi Pc
50](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pc-50){.ref}), and achieved
the wisdom of awakening ([MN 44](https://suttacentral.net/mn44){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter
Classification`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷavedallasutta`</cite>`{=html}).
While it is true that certain of the rules as they exist today
discriminate against the nuns, other rules protect them; for example,
the monks are forbidden from having a nun wash their robes, thus
preventing the monks from treating the nuns like domestic servants. When
monks taught the nuns, they did so respectfully, engaging with them as
equals ([MN 146](https://suttacentral.net/mn146){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Advice from
Nandaka`</cite>`{=html}). The order of nuns gave women of the time a
rare opportunity to pursue their own spiritual path, supported by the
community. It survived through the years in the East Asian traditions,
and in recent years has been revived within the Tibetan and Theravādin
schools.

Note that in the suttas, the term *bhikkhu* (masculine gender) is used
as a generic term to include both monks and nuns. That nuns were
included in the generic masculine is clear from such contexts as [AN
4.170](https://suttacentral.net/an4.170){.ref}, where Ānanda begins by
referring to "monks and nuns" and continues with just "monks", or [DN
16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16){.ref}, which speaks of "monks and
nuns" but uses a masculine pronoun to refer to them both. That the
default masculine may refer to women is further confirmed by passages
such as [Thig 16.1](https://suttacentral.net/thig16.1){.ref}, where the
lady Sumedhā is called *putta* by her father. *Putta* as "son" contrasts
with *dhītā* as "daughter", but this passage shows it can be used in the
generic sense of "child" as well. In general teaching, it is likely that
monks and nuns, as well as lay people, would have been present, yet the
texts by convention are addressed to "monks" (*bhikkhave*). Hence I have
rendered *bhikkhu* throughout with the gender-neutral "mendicant",
except where it is necessary to distinguish the genders, in which case I
use "monk". In the Vinaya Piṭaka, however, the texts are by default
separated by gender, so it is best to use "monk" there. Note too that
"mendicant" is what *bhikkhu* actually means: it refers to someone who
makes a living by walking for alms.

Originally the Saṅgha followed an informal set of principles considered
appropriate for ascetics, which was similar to those followed by other
ascetic groups. These are retained in detail in the ethics portion of
the Gradual Training ([MN 51](https://suttacentral.net/mn51){.ref}; [DN
1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1){.ref}, etc.). The Buddha initially
refused to set up a formal system of monastic law, but eventually the
Saṅgha grew so large that such a system became necessary ([Bu Pj
1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1){.ref}). This is detailed
in the extensive texts of the Vinaya Piṭaka. Note that when the word
*vinaya* is used in the four *nikāyas*, it rarely refers to the Vinaya
Piṭaka. Normally it is a general term for the practical application of
the teaching: *dhammavinaya* means something like "theory and practice".

Scattered throughout the four *nikāyas* we find a fair number of
teachings intended for the monastic community. Sometimes these refer to
technical procedures of the Vinaya Piṭaka, probably to make sure that
students of the suttas would be familiar with them ([MN
104](https://suttacentral.net/mn104){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}At Sāmagāma`</cite>`{=html}).
More commonly, however, they were general principles of ethics, laying
down guidelines for a harmonious and flourishing spiritual community.

In [MN 3](https://suttacentral.net/mn3){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Dhammadāyāda`</cite>`{=html} the Buddha
teaches his mendicants to be his "heirs in the teaching", inheriting
spiritual, not material things from their Teacher. In [MN
5](https://suttacentral.net/mn5){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Unblemished`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Anaṅgaṇasutta`</cite>`{=html}),
Venerables Sāriputta and Moggallāna speak of the those who have
"blemishes" that spoil their spiritual integrity. When guilty of an
offense, rather than clearing it by confession, they hide it. Or they
hope the Buddha asks them a question about the teaching, or that they
get the best food at mealtime. Such things appear small, but over time
they corrupt, so they must be polished off diligently, for scrupulous
attention to ethics is the foundation for all higher achievements in the
spiritual path ([MN 6](https://suttacentral.net/mn6){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}One Might Wish`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Ākaṅkheyyasutta`</cite>`{=html}). It is
essential for community members to be open to admonition, for otherwise
they cannot identify their flaws and heal them ([MN
15](https://suttacentral.net/mn15){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Measuring Up`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Anumānasutta`</cite>`{=html}). But a
community cannot be based on sniping and criticism, but on love,
generosity, and respect ([MN 16](https://suttacentral.net/mn16){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Emotional
Barrenness`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cetokhilasutta`</cite>`{=html}).

Not all were satisfied with the Buddha's path. A certain
Sunakkhatta---familiar from [DN
24](https://suttacentral.net/dn24){.ref}---disrobed, for he wanted to
see more miracles, and thought the mere ending of suffering was a poor
goal ([MN 12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12){.ref}; see too [MN
63](https://suttacentral.net/mn63){.ref}). The monk Ariṭṭha went even
further, directly contradicting the fundamental principles of the Dhamma
by declaring that the things the Buddha said were harmful were not, in
fact, harmful ([MN 22](https://suttacentral.net/mn22){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Simile of the
Snake`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Alagaddūpamasutta`</cite>`{=html}).
This event prompted the establishment of several Vinaya rules, showing
the interdependence of these bodies of literature ([Bu Pc
68](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc68){.ref}, [Bu Pc
69](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc69){.ref}; [Kd
11](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd11){.ref}).

Sometimes problems went beyond just an individual, and a whole community
could split apart. [MN 48](https://suttacentral.net/mn48){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Mendicants of
Kosambi`</cite>`{=html}, which also has parallels in the Vinaya, tells
of how a community can be split because of an apparently trivial
difference. They became so consumed by anger and conceit that they even
ignored the Buddha's attempts at reconciliation. Eventually, though,
they came to their senses. Likewise, the monks at Cātuma ([MN
67](https://suttacentral.net/mn67){.ref}) were so unruly the Buddha
dismissed them, but was persuaded to relent.

Reconciliation and growth is also the message of [MN
65](https://suttacentral.net/mn65){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Bhaddāli`</cite>`{=html},
where the Buddha requests that the mendicants eat before noon. Bhaddāli
refuses, out of greed and stubbornness, but later accepts the Buddha's
ruling and is forgiven. This rule was a big deal, for it is also
discussed in [MN 66](https://suttacentral.net/mn66){.ref} and [MN
70](https://suttacentral.net/mn70){.ref}.

But in general the suttas paint a glowingly positive view of the
renunciate life, leaving the Vinaya Piṭaka to deal with the nitty-gritty
of human failings. [MN 31](https://suttacentral.net/mn31){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Shorter Discourse at
Gosiṅga`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷagosiṅgasutta`</cite>`{=html}
depicts an idyllic fellowship of three monks living in gracious and
fulfilling harmony, where the simplicity and purity of their lifestyle
form the basis for advanced meditation (see [MN
128](https://suttacentral.net/mn128){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Corruptions`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Upakkilesasutta`</cite>`{=html}, which
shares the same setting). The Saṅgha lives honoring the Buddha not out
of fear but from genuine love and respect ([MN
77](https://suttacentral.net/mn77){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Longer Discourse with
Sakuludāyī`</cite>`{=html}). By practicing in line with the Dhamma, they
honor their Teacher and become worthy of their alms-food ([MN
151](https://suttacentral.net/mn151){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Purification of
Alms`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Piṇḍapātapārisuddhisutta`</cite>`{=html}).

## The Wider Community {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item8}

The monastics are far from the only people we meet. In his wide
wanderings across the Ganges plain, the Buddha interacted with a wide
cross-section of the local peoples: learned brahmins and simple
villagers; kings and slaves; priests and prostitutes; women and men;
children and the elderly; the devout and the skeptical; the sick and the
disabled; those seeking to disparage and those sincerely seeking the
truth.

It should not be thought that teachings for monastics and lay were
completely separated. For example, [MN
7](https://suttacentral.net/mn7){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The Simile of the
Cloth`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Vatthasutta`</cite>`{=html} or
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Vatthūpamasutta`</cite>`{=html}) begins
with a standard teaching to the mendicants about purifying the mind,
leading up to the divine meditations and full awakening. The Buddha
calls such a person "bathed with the inner bathing". At this, the
brahmin Sundarika---who happened to be sitting nearby---protested,
saying that the brahmins attested to the purifying properties of bathing
in the river Bāhuka. This casual example shows that, even when a
discourse is addressed to the mendicants, a wide range of people,
including non-Buddhists, might be present.

The brahmin from [MN 7](https://suttacentral.net/mn7){.ref} ended up
taking ordination. However, there are also many cases of long-term
practitioners who remained in the lay life. In [MN
14](https://suttacentral.net/mn14){.ref}
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Cūḷadukkhakkhandha`</cite>`{=html}, the
Buddha's relative Mahānāma laments that despite his long years of
practice, he still has greed, hate, and delusion. Lay meditators
struggled to find deep peace of mind in those days, just like today.

Such cases show how the Buddha spoke to individuals, addressing their
specific needs and concerns. Elsewhere he gave more general discourses
on ethical principles. In [MN 41](https://suttacentral.net/mn41){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}The People of
Sālā`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sāleyyakasutta`</cite>`{=html}), he
teaches a group of non-Buddhist lay people what are commonly called the
"ten ways of doing skillful deeds" (*dasakusalakammapathā*; see [AN
10.176](https://suttacentral.net/an10.176){.ref}):

1.  No killing
2.  No stealing
3.  No sexual misconduct
4.  True speech
5.  Harmonious speech
6.  Gentle speech
7.  Meaningful speech
8.  No covetousness
9.  No ill will
10. Right view

The first three pertain to the body; the second four to speech, and the
final three to the mind. These extend the well-known five precepts,
offering a complete guide to ethical living. They are taught in many
places in the suttas, and here they are defined in detail.

While in the Majjhima, and everywhere in the canon, formalistic and
artificial settings dominate, several discourses have somewhat messy
narrative structures, which seem to preserve the memory of real-life
incidents. In [MN 51](https://suttacentral.net/mn51){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Kandaraka`</cite>`{=html}
the Buddha is approached by an elephant driver named Pessa and a
wandering ascetic named Kandaraka. Kandaraka is impressed by the silence
of the Saṅgha, prompting the Buddha to attribute this to their practice
of mindfulness meditation. Pessa intervenes, saying that lay folk also
sometimes practice mindfulness, and the Buddha engages him on the topic
of people who act for their own harm or benefit, or that of others; a
topic familiar from the Aṅguttara ([AN
4.198](https://suttacentral.net/an4.198){.ref}). But Pessa has to leave,
at which the Buddha says he would have benefited by staying. The
mendicants ask the Buddha to finish what he was about to say, at which
he gives a lengthy version of the Gradual Training. We don't hear about
what happened to either Pessa or Kandaraka. We do, however, find the
Gradual Training taught to lay folk elsewhere, for example by Ānanda on
the occasion of opening a new community hall belonging to his clan, the
Sakyans ([MN 53](https://suttacentral.net/mn53){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}A Trainee`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Sekhasutta`</cite>`{=html}). Indeed,
the gradual progress of a mendicant is compared with a graduated
professional education of an accountant ([MN
107](https://suttacentral.net/mn107){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Moggallāna the
Accountant`</cite>`{=html},
`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Gaṇakamoggallānasutta`</cite>`{=html}).

In addition to personal problems and general ethical teachings, the
Buddha responded to criticisms of his community, not with defensiveness,
but by a clear explanation. In [MN
55](https://suttacentral.net/mn55){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Jīvaka`</cite>`{=html}, the
Buddha's physician reports that people are saying that the Buddha eats
meat that has been slaughtered on purpose for him. The Buddha denies
this, saying that he and his mendicants only accept food that has been
freely offered, and will refuse any meat they suspect has been killed
for them.

While the critics are not identified in [MN
55](https://suttacentral.net/mn55){.ref}, [MN
56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Upāli`</cite>`{=html} and
[MN 58](https://suttacentral.net/mn58){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Prince
Abhaya`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Abhayarājakumārasutta`</cite>`{=html})
depicts the Jains as deliberately trying to take down the Buddha in
debate, and---since these are Buddhist texts---failing. Brahmins attempt
the same trick, sending their most precocious scholars against the
Buddha with no more success ([MN
93](https://suttacentral.net/mn93){.ref}, [MN
95](https://suttacentral.net/mn95){.ref}).

A few discourses focus not on the Buddha's message as such, but on the
impact it had on family life. When the wealthy young man Raṭṭhapāla
ordains, his parents are highly distressed and try to entice him to
disrobe ([MN 82](https://suttacentral.net/mn82){.ref}). [MN
87](https://suttacentral.net/mn87){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Born From the
Beloved`</cite>`{=html}
(`<cite class="text-root">`{=html}Piyajātikasutta`</cite>`{=html}) gives
us a glimpse into the family life of King Pasenadi and Queen Mallikā.
They hear of the Buddha's teaching that our loved ones bring us
suffering, and when Mallikā agrees with this, her husband is not pleased
at all. Mallikā is careful to first confirm that the teaching was what
the Buddha said, then she gently and kindly explains the teaching to the
King, leading him to announce his faith in the Buddha. He became a
devoted follower featured in many discourses. [MN
100](https://suttacentral.net/mn100){.ref}
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}With Saṅgārava`</cite>`{=html} is
another case where a wife leads her husband to the Dhamma.

It is not only the great and the good who need teachings. The suttas
depict Venerable Sāriputta helping his old friend Dhanañjāni, who was
redeemed near the end of his life, despite his long career of corruption
([MN 97](https://suttacentral.net/mn97){.ref}). Even the serial killer
Aṅgulimāla found redemption and forgiveness ([MN
86](https://suttacentral.net/mn86){.ref}; cf. [Thag
16.8](https://suttacentral.net/thag16.8){.ref}).

## A Brief Textual History {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item9}

The Majjhima Nikāya was edited by V. Trenckner (vol. 1) and Robert
Chalmers (vols. 2 and 3) based on manuscripts in Sinhalese, Burmese, and
Thai scripts, and published in Latin script by the Pali Text Society
from 1888 to 1899. The first translation into English followed in
1926--7 by Robert Chalmers under the title
`<cite class="book">`{=html}Further Dialogues of the
Buddha`</cite>`{=html}.

Rapid improvements in understanding of Pali and Buddhism during the
early 20th century soon made it clear that an improved translation was
needed. This was undertaken in the 1950s by I.B. Horner and was
published by the PTS as `<cite class="book">`{=html}The Book of Middle
Length Sayings`</cite>`{=html} in 1954--9.

Her translation, while a significant improvement on Chalmers', was soon
eclipsed by that of Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi. Ñāṇamoḷi's extraordinary career as
a Pali scholar and translator was tragically cut short by his early
death, and his Majjhima Nikāya translation remained as an unfinished
hand-written manuscript. Nevertheless, its value was so clear that it
was published, first as a selection of 90 discourses edited by Bhikkhu
Khantipalo and published in Bangkok in 1976 as
`<cite class="book">`{=html}A Treasury of the Buddha's
Words`</cite>`{=html}, then as a fully edited and updated version by
Bhikkhu Bodhi in 1995 under the title `<cite class="book">`{=html}The
Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima
Nikaya`</cite>`{=html}. The latter version reached a peak of accuracy,
consistency, and readability that has become the standard to which all
later translations of the *nikāyas* have aspired.

When the Pali was unclear I frequently referred to the earlier work of
Ñāṇamoḷi & Bodhi (both the published work and Ñāṇamoḷi's hand-written
original), and less often to Horner and various translations of specific
texts. I also had access to notes by Bhikkhus Ñāṇadīpa and Ñāṇatusita on
Bhikkhu Bodhi's translation. In addition, I consulted the Chinese and
other parallel texts, and the detailed studies on these by Bhikkhu
Anālayo. However, I found these to be useful for translation in only a
few instances, as I believe it is important to preserve the integrity of
the different textual lineages. Comparative studies lose value when the
underlying texts have already been reconciled.

</article>

[]{#acknowledgements.xhtml}

<article class="acknowledgements" id="acknowledgements">

# Acknowledgements

I remember with gratitude all those from whom I have learned the Dhamma,
especially Ajahn Brahm and Bhikkhu Bodhi, the two monks who more than
anyone else showed me the depth, meaning, and practical value of the
Suttas.

Special thanks to Dustin and Keiko Cheah and family, who sponsored my
stay in Qi Mei while I made this translation.

Thanks also for Blake Walshe, who provided essential software support
for my translation work.

Throughout the process of translation, I have frequently sought feedback
and suggestions from the SuttaCentral community on our forum, "Discuss
and Discover". I want to thank all those who have made suggestions and
contributed to my understanding, as well as to the moderators who have
made the forum possible. These translations were significantly improved
due to the careful work of my proofreaders: Ayyā Pāsādā, John and Lynn
Kelly, and Derek Sola. Special thanks are due to Sabbamittā, a true
friend of all, who has tirelessly and precisely checked my work.

Finally my everlasting thanks to all those people, far too many to
mention, who have supported SuttaCentral, and those who have supported
my life as a monastic. None of this would be possible without you.

</article>

[]{#blurbs.xhtml}

<article class="blurbs" id="blurbs">

# Summary of Contents

[[ [Middle Discourses Collection ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Majjhimanikāya]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn){.blurb-link}
:   [The Middle Discourses (Majjhima Nikāya, abbreviated MN) is a
    collection of 152 discourses in the Pali canon (Tipiṭaka) of the
    Theravada school of Buddhism. The word "middle" refers to the length
    of the individual discourses. This is perhaps the most popular
    collection of early discourses. It contains a wide variety of
    teachings, many of them presented as narratives between the Buddha
    and a diverse range of his contemporaries. The collection parallels
    the Madhyamāgama (MA) of the Sarvāstivāda school, which survives as
    a translation in the Chinese canon.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on the Root of All Things ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mūlapariyāyavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn-mulapariyayavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [This chapter, though beginning with the abstruse Mūlapariyāya
    Sutta, mostly contains foundational teachings and can, as a whole,
    serve as an introduction to the discourses.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 1]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Root of All Things ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mūlapariyāyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn1){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha examines how the notion of a permanent self emerges from
    the process of perception. A wide range of phenomena are considered,
    embracing both naturalistic and cosmological dimensions. An
    unawakened person interprets experience in terms of a self, while
    those more advanced have the same experiences without
    attachment.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 2]{.blurb-item .acronym} [All the Defilements ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sabbāsavasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn2){.blurb-link}
:   [The diverse problems of the spiritual journey demand a diverse
    range of responses. Rather than applying the same solution to every
    problem, the Buddha outlines seven methods of dealing with
    defilements, each of which works in certain cases.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 3]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Heirs in the Teaching ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dhammadāyādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn3){.blurb-link}
:   [Some of the Buddha's students inherit from him only material
    profits and fame. But his true inheritance is the spiritual path,
    the way of contentment. Venerable Sāriputta explains how by
    following the Buddha's example we can experience the fruits of the
    path.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 4]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Fear and Dread ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bhayabheravasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn4){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains the difficulties of living in the wilderness,
    and how they are overcome by purity of conduct and meditation. He
    recounts some of the fears and obstacles he faced during his own
    practice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 5]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Unblemished ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anaṅgaṇasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn5){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha's chief disciples, Sāriputta and Moggallāna, use a
    simile of a tarnished bowl to illustrate the blemishes of the mind
    and conduct. They emphasize how the crucial thing is not so much
    whether there are blemishes, but whether we are aware of
    them.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 6]{.blurb-item .acronym} [One Might Wish ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ākaṅkheyyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn6){.blurb-link}
:   [According to the Buddha, careful observance of ethical precepts is
    the foundation of all higher achievements in the spiritual
    life.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 7]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Simile of the Cloth ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vatthasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn7){.blurb-link}
:   [The many different kinds of impurities that defile the mind are
    compared to a dirty cloth. When the mind is clean we find joy, which
    leads to states of higher consciousness. Finally, the Buddha rejects
    the Brahmanical notion that purity comes from bathing in sacred
    rivers.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 8]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Self-Effacement ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sallekhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn8){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha differentiates between peaceful meditation and spiritual
    practices that encompass the whole of life. He lists forty-four
    aspects, which he explains as "effacement", the wearing away of
    conceit.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 9]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Right View ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sammādiṭṭhisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn9){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Sāriputta gives a detailed explanation of right view, the
    first factor of the noble eightfold path. At the prompting of the
    other mendicants, he approaches the topic from a wide range of
    perspectives.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 10]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn10){.blurb-link}
:   [Here the Buddha details the seventh factor of the noble eightfold
    path, mindfulness meditation. This collects many of the meditation
    teachings found throughout the canon, especially the foundational
    practices focusing on the body, and is regarded as one of the most
    important meditation discourses.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on the Lion's Roar ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sīhanādavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn-sihanadavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Beginning with two discourses containing a "lion's roar", this
    chapter deals with suffering, community life, and practical
    meditation advice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 11]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Lion's Roar ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷasīhanādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn11){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha declares that only those following his path can
    genuinely experience the four stages of awakening. This is because,
    while much is shared with other systems, none of them go so far as
    to fully reject all attachment to the idea of a
    self.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 12]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Lion's Roar ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsīhanādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn12){.blurb-link}
:   [A disrobed monk, Sunakkhatta, attacks the Buddha's teaching because
    it merely leads to the end of suffering. The Buddha counters that
    this is, in fact, praise, and goes on to enumerate his many profound
    and powerful achievements.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 13]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Mass of Suffering ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahādukkhakkhandhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn13){.blurb-link}
:   [Challenged to show the difference between his teaching and that of
    other ascetics, the Buddha points out that they speak of letting go,
    but do not really understand why. He then explains in great detail
    the suffering that arises from attachment to sensual
    stimulation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 14]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷadukkhakkhandhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn14){.blurb-link}
:   [A lay person is puzzled at how, despite their long practice, they
    still have greedy or hateful thoughts. The Buddha explains the
    importance of absorption meditation for letting go such attachments.
    But he also criticizes self-mortification, and recounts a previous
    dialog with Jain ascetics.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 15]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Measuring Up ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anumānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn15){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Moggallāna raises the topic of admonishment, without
    which healthy community is not possible. He lists a number of
    qualities that will encourage others to think it worthwhile to
    admonish you in a constructive way.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 16]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Emotional Barrenness ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cetokhilasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn16){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains various ways one can become emotionally cut off
    from one's spiritual community.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 17]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Jungle Thickets ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vanapatthasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn17){.blurb-link}
:   [While living in the wilderness is great, not everyone is ready for
    it. The Buddha encourages meditators to reflect on whether one's
    environment is genuinely supporting their meditation practice, and
    if not, to leave.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 18]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Honey-Cake ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Madhupiṇḍikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn18){.blurb-link}
:   [Challenged by a brahmin, the Buddha gives an enigmatic response on
    how conflict arises due to proliferation based on perceptions.
    Venerable Kaccāna draws out the detailed implications of this in one
    of the most insightful passages in the entire
    canon.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 19]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Two Kinds of Thought ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dvedhāvitakkasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn19){.blurb-link}
:   [Recounting his own experiences in developing meditation, the Buddha
    explains how to understand harmful and harmless thoughts, and how to
    go beyond thought altogether.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 20]{.blurb-item .acronym} [How to Stop Thinking ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vitakkasaṇṭhānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn20){.blurb-link}
:   [In a practical meditation teaching, the Buddha describes five
    different approaches to stopping thoughts.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter of Similes ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Opammavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn-opammavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [A diverse chapter including biography, non-violence, not-self, and
    an influential teaching on the progress of
    meditation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 21]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Simile of the Saw ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kakacūpamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn21){.blurb-link}
:   [A discourse full of vibrant and memorable similes, on the
    importance of patience and love even when faced with abuse and
    criticism. The Buddha finishes with the simile of the saw, one of
    the most memorable similes found in the discourses.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 22]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Simile of the Snake ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Alagaddūpamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn22){.blurb-link}
:   [One of the monks denies that prohibited conduct is really a
    problem. The monks and then the Buddha subject him to an impressive
    dressing down. The Buddha compares someone who understands only the
    letter of the teachings to someone who grabs a snake by the tail,
    and also invokes the famous simile of the raft.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 23]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Ant-Hill ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vammikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn23){.blurb-link}
:   [In a curious discourse laden with evocative imagery, a deity
    presents a riddle to a mendicant, who seeks an answer from the
    Buddha.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 24]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Prepared Chariots ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Rathavinītasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn24){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Sāriputta seeks a dialog with an esteemed monk, Venerable
    Puṇṇa Mantāniputta, and they discuss the stages of
    purification.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 25]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Fodder ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Nivāpasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn25){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha compares getting trapped by Māra with a deer getting
    caught in a snare, illustrating the ever more complex strategies
    employed by hunter and hunted.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 26]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Noble Search ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pāsarāsisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn26){.blurb-link}
:   [This is one of the most important biographical discourses, telling
    the Buddha's experiences from leaving home to realizing awakening.
    Throughout, he was driven by the imperative to fully escape from
    rebirth and suffering.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 27]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Elephant's Footprint Simile ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷahatthipadopamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn27){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha cautions against swift conclusions about a teacher's
    spiritual accomplishments, comparing it to the care a tracker would
    use when tracking elephants. He presents the full training of a
    monastic.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 28]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Simile of the Elephant's Footprint ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāhatthipadopamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn28){.blurb-link}
:   [Sāriputta gives an elaborate demonstration of how, just as any
    footprint can fit inside an elephant's, all the Buddha's teaching
    can fit inside the four noble truths. This offers an overall
    template for organizing the Buddha's teachings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 29]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Simile of the Heartwood ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsāropamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn29){.blurb-link}
:   [Following the incident with Devadatta, the Buddha cautions the
    mendicants against becoming complacent with superficial benefits of
    spiritual life and points to liberation as the true heart of the
    teaching.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 30]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Simile of the Heartwood ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷasāropamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn30){.blurb-link}
:   [Similar to the previous. After the incident with Devadatta, the
    Buddha cautions the mendicants against becoming complacent and
    points to liberation as the true heart of the
    teaching.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Greater Chapter on Pairs ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāyamakavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn-mahayamakavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Discourses arranged as pairs of longer and shorter
    texts.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 31]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse at Gosiṅga ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷagosiṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn31){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha comes across three mendicants practicing diligently and
    harmoniously, and asks them how they do it. Reluctant to disclose
    their higher attainments, they explain how they deal with the
    practical affairs of living together. But when pressed by the
    Buddha, they reveal their meditation attainments.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 32]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse at Gosiṅga ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāgosiṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn32){.blurb-link}
:   [Several senior mendicants, reveling in the beauty of the night,
    discuss what kind of practitioner would adorn the park. They take
    their answers to the Buddha, who praises their answers, but gives
    his own twist.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 33]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Cowherd ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāgopālakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn33){.blurb-link}
:   [For eleven reasons a cowherd is not able to properly look after a
    herd. The Buddha compares this to the spiritual growth of a
    mendicant.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 34]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Cowherd ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷagopālakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn34){.blurb-link}
:   [Drawing parallels with a cowherd guiding his herd across a
    dangerous river, the Buddha presents the various kinds of
    enlightened disciples who cross the stream of
    transmigration.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 35]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Saccaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷasaccakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn35){.blurb-link}
:   [Saccaka was a debater, who challenged the Buddha to a contest.
    Despite his bragging, the Buddha is not at all perturbed at his
    attacks.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 36]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Saccaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsaccakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn36){.blurb-link}
:   [In a less confrontational meeting, the Buddha and Saccaka discuss
    the difference between physical and mental development. The Buddha
    gives a long account of the various practices he did before
    awakening, detailing the astonishing lengths he took to mortify the
    body.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 37]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Ending of Craving ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷataṇhāsaṅkhayasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn37){.blurb-link}
:   [Moggallāna visits the heaven of Sakka, the lord of gods, to see
    whether he really understands what the Buddha is
    teaching.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 38]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Ending of Craving ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhayasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn38){.blurb-link}
:   [To counter the wrong view that a self-identical consciousness
    transmigrates from one life to the next, the Buddha teaches
    dependent origination, showing that consciousness invariably arises
    dependent on conditions.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 39]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse at Assapura ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāassapurasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn39){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha encourages the mendicants to live up to their name, by
    actually practicing in a way that meets or exceeds the expectations
    people have for renunciants.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 40]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse at Assapura ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷaassapurasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn40){.blurb-link}
:   [The labels of being a spiritual practitioner don't just come from
    external trappings, but from sincere inner change.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Lesser Chapter on Pairs ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷayamakavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn-culayamakavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [A similar arrangement to the previous.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 41]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The People of Sālā ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sāleyyakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn41){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains to a group of brahmins the conduct leading to
    rebirth in higher or lower states, including detailed explanations
    of the ten core practices which lay people should undertake, and
    which also form the basis for liberation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 42]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The People of Verañja ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Verañjakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn42){.blurb-link}
:   [Similar to the previous. The Buddha explains the conduct leading to
    rebirth in higher or lower states, including detailed explanations
    of the ten core practices.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 43]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Classification ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāvedallasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn43){.blurb-link}
:   [A series of questions and answers between Sāriputta and
    Mahākoṭṭhita, examining various subtle and abstruse aspects of the
    teachings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 44]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Classification ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷavedallasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn44){.blurb-link}
:   [The layman Visākha asks the nun Dhammadinnā about various difficult
    matters, including some of the highest meditation attainments. The
    Buddha fully endorses her answers.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 45]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on Taking Up Practices ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷadhammasamādānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn45){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains how taking up different practices may have
    harmful or beneficial results. The memorable simile of the creeper
    shows how insidious temptations can be.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 46]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Taking Up Practices ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahādhammasamādānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn46){.blurb-link}
:   [While we all want to be happy, we often find the opposite happens.
    The Buddha explains why.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 47]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Inquirer ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vīmaṁsakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn47){.blurb-link}
:   [While some spiritual teachers prefer to remain in obscurity, the
    Buddha not only encouraged his followers to closely investigate him,
    but gave them a detailed and demanding method to do
    so.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 48]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Mendicants of Kosambi ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kosambiyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn48){.blurb-link}
:   [Despite the Buddha's presence, the monks of Kosambi fell into a
    deep and bitter dispute. The Buddha taught the reluctant monks to
    develop love and harmony, reminding them of the state of peace that
    they sought.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 49]{.blurb-item .acronym} [On the Invitation of Brahmā ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Brahmanimantanikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn49){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha ascends to a high heavenly realm where he engages in a
    cosmic contest with a powerful divinity, who had fallen into the
    delusion that he was eternal and all-powerful.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 50]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Rebuke of Māra ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Māratajjanīyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn50){.blurb-link}
:   [Māra, the trickster and god of death, tried to annoy Moggallāna. He
    not only failed but was subject to a stern sermon warning of the
    dangers of attacking the Buddha's disciples.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Householders ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Gahapativagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn-gahapativagga){.blurb-link}
:   [This chapter is addressed to a diverse range of lay
    people.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 51]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Kandaraka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kandarakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn51){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha discusses mindfulness meditation with lay practitioners.
    Contrasting the openness of animals with the duplicity of humans, he
    explains how to practice in a way that causes no harm to oneself or
    others.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 52]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Man From the City of Aṭṭhaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Aṭṭhakanāgarasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn52){.blurb-link}
:   [Asked by a householder to teach a path to freedom, Venerable Ānanda
    explains no less than eleven meditative states that may serve as
    doors to the deathless.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 53]{.blurb-item .acronym} [A Trainee ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sekhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn53){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha is invited by his family, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu,
    to inaugurate a new community hall. He invites Venerable Ānanda to
    explain in detail the stages of spiritual practice for a lay
    trainee.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 54]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Potaliya the Householder ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Potaliyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn54){.blurb-link}
:   [When Potaliya got upset at being referred to as "householder", the
    Buddha quizzed him as to the true nature of attachment and
    renunciation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 55]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Jīvaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Jīvakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn55){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha's personal doctor, Jīvaka, hears criticisms of the
    Buddha's policy regarding eating meat, and asks him about
    it.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 56]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Upāli ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Upālisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn56){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha disagrees with a Jain ascetic on the question of whether
    physical or mental deeds are more important. When he hears of this,
    the Jain disciple Upāli decides to visit the Buddha and refute him,
    and proceeds despite all warnings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 57]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Ascetic Who Behaved Like a Dog ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kukkuravatikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn57){.blurb-link}
:   [Some ascetics in ancient India undertook extreme practices, such as
    a vow to behave like an ox or a dog. The Buddha meets two such
    individuals, and is reluctantly pressed to reveal the kammic
    outcomes of such practice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 58]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Prince Abhaya ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Abhayarājakumārasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn58){.blurb-link}
:   [The leader of the Jains, Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, gives his disciple
    Prince Abhaya a dilemma to pose to the Buddha, supposing that this
    will show his weakness. Things don't go quite as
    planned.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 59]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Many Kinds of Feeling ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bahuvedanīyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn59){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha resolves a disagreement on the number of kinds of
    feelings that he taught, pointing out that different ways of
    teaching are appropriate in different contexts, and should not be a
    cause of disputes. He goes on to show the importance of pleasure in
    developing higher meditation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 60]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Guaranteed ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Apaṇṇakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn60){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha teaches a group of uncommitted householders how to use a
    rational reflection to arrive at practices and principles that are
    guaranteed to have a good outcome, even if we don't know all the
    variables.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Mendicants ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bhikkhuvagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn-bhikkhuvagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Ten discourses to monks, many of them focusing on matters of
    discipline.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 61]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice to Rāhula at Ambalaṭṭhika ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ambalaṭṭhikarāhulovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn61){.blurb-link}
:   [Using the "object lesson" of a cup of water, the Buddha explains to
    his son, Rāhula, the importance of telling the truth and reflecting
    on one's motives.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 62]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Advice to Rāhula ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahārāhulovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn62){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha tells Rāhula to meditate on not-self, which he
    immediately puts into practice. Seeing him, Venerable Sāriputta
    advises him to develop breath meditation, but the Buddha suggests a
    wide range of different practices first.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 63]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Māluṅkya ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷamālukyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn63){.blurb-link}
:   [A monk demands that the Buddha answer his metaphysical questions,
    or else he will disrobe. The Buddha compares him to a man struck by
    an arrow, who refuses treatment until he can have all his questions
    about the arrow and the archer answered.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 64]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Māluṅkya ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāmālukyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn64){.blurb-link}
:   [A little baby has no wrong views or intentions, but the underlying
    tendency for these things is still there. Without practicing, they
    will inevitably recur.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 65]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Bhaddāli ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bhaddālisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn65){.blurb-link}
:   [A monk refuses to follow the rule forbidding eating after noon, but
    is filled with remorse and forgiven.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 66]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Simile of the Quail ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Laṭukikopamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn66){.blurb-link}
:   [Again raising the rule regarding eating, but this time as a
    reflection of gratitude for the Buddha in eliminating things that
    cause complexity and stress. The Buddha emphasizes how attachment
    even to little things can be dangerous.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 67]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Cātumā ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cātumasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn67){.blurb-link}
:   [After dismissing some unruly monks, the Buddha is persuaded to
    relent, and teaches them four dangers for those gone
    forth.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 68]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Naḷakapāna ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Naḷakapānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn68){.blurb-link}
:   [Those who practice do so not because they are failures, but because
    they aspire to higher freedom. When he speaks of the attainments of
    disciples, the Buddha does so in order to inspire.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 69]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Gulissāni ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Goliyānisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn69){.blurb-link}
:   [A monk comes down to the community from the wilderness, but doesn't
    behave properly. Venerable Sāriputta explains how a mendicant should
    behave, whether in forest or town.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 70]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Kīṭāgiri ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kīṭāgirisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn70){.blurb-link}
:   [A third discourse that presents the health benefits of eating in
    one part of the day, and the reluctance of some mendicants to follow
    this.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Wanderers ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Paribbājakavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn-paribbajakavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha in dialog with ascetics and wanderers.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 71]{.blurb-item .acronym} [To Vacchagotta on the Three Knowledges ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Tevijjavacchasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn71){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha denies being omniscient, and sets forth the three higher
    knowledges that form the core of his awakened
    insight.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 72]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Vacchagotta on Fire ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Aggivacchasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn72){.blurb-link}
:   [Refusing to take a stance regarding useless metaphysical
    speculations, the Buddha illustrates the spiritual goal with the
    simile of a flame going out.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 73]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Vacchagotta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāvacchasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn73){.blurb-link}
:   [In the final installment of the "Vacchagotta trilogy", Vacchagotta
    lets go his obsession with meaningless speculation, and asks about
    practice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 74]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Dīghanakha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dīghanakhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn74){.blurb-link}
:   [Deftly outmaneuvering an extreme skeptic, the Buddha discusses the
    outcomes of belief and disbelief. Rather than getting stuck in
    abstractions, he encourages staying close to the feelings one
    experiences.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 75]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Māgaṇḍiya ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Māgaṇḍiyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn75){.blurb-link}
:   [Accused by a hedonist of being too negative, the Buddha recounts
    the luxury of his upbringing, and his realization of how little
    value there was in such things. Through renunciation he found a far
    greater pleasure.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 76]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Sandaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sandakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn76){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Ānanda teaches a group of wanderers how there are many
    different approaches to the spiritual life, many of which lead
    nowhere.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 77]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse with Sakuludāyī ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsakuludāyisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn77){.blurb-link}
:   [Unlike many teachers, the Buddha's followers treat him with genuine
    love and respect, since they see the sincerity of his teaching and
    practice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 78]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Uggāhamāna Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Samaṇamuṇḍikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn78){.blurb-link}
:   [A wanderer teaches that a person has reached the highest attainment
    when they keep four basic ethical precepts. The Buddha's standards
    are considerably higher.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 79]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Sakuludāyī ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷasakuludāyisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn79){.blurb-link}
:   [A wanderer teaches his doctrine of the "highest splendor" but is
    unable to give a satisfactory account of what that means. The Buddha
    memorably compares him to someone who is in love with an idealized
    women who he has never met.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 80]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Vekhanasa ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vekhanasasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn80){.blurb-link}
:   [Starting off similar to the previous, the Buddha goes on to explain
    that one is not converted to his teaching just because of clever
    arguments, but because you see in yourself the results of the
    practice.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Kings ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Rājavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn-rajavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Various dialogs with kings and princes, many of whom followed the
    Buddha.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 81]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Ghaṭīkāra ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ghaṭikārasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn81){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha relates an unusual account of a past life in the time of
    the previous Buddha, Kassapa. At that time he was not interested in
    Dhamma, and had to be forced to go see the Buddha. This discourse is
    important in understanding the development of the Bodhisattva
    doctrine.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 82]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Raṭṭhapāla ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Raṭṭhapālasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn82){.blurb-link}
:   [A wealthy young man, Raṭṭhapāla, has a strong aspiration to go
    forth, but has to prevail against the reluctance of his parents.
    Even after he became a monk, his parents tried to persuade him to
    disrobe. The discourse ends with a moving series of teachings on the
    fragility of the world.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 83]{.blurb-item .acronym} [About King Maghadeva ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Maghadevasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn83){.blurb-link}
:   [A rare extended mythic narrative, telling of an ancient kingly
    lineage and their eventual downfall.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 84]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Madhurā ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Madhurasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn84){.blurb-link}
:   [In Madhurā, towards the north-eastern limit of the Buddha's reach
    during his life, King Avantiputta asks Venerable Mahākaccāna
    regarding the brahmanical claim to be the highest
    caste.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 85]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Prince Bodhi ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bodhirājakumārasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn85){.blurb-link}
:   [Admitting that he used to believe that pleasure was to be gained
    through pain, the Buddha explains how his practice showed him the
    fallacy of that idea.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 86]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Aṅgulimāla ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Aṅgulimālasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn86){.blurb-link}
:   [Ignoring warnings, the Buddha ventures into the domain of the
    notorious killer Aṅgulimāla and succeeds in converting him to the
    path of non-violence. After becoming a monk Aṅgulimāla still
    suffered for his past deeds, but only to a small extent. He uses his
    new commitment to non-violence to help a woman in
    labor.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 87]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Born From the Beloved ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Piyajātikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn87){.blurb-link}
:   [A rare glimpse into the marital life of King Pasenadi, and how he
    is led to the Dhamma by his Queen, the incomparable Mallikā. She
    confirms the Buddha's teaching that our loved ones bring us sorrow;
    but that's not something a husband, father, and king wants to
    hear.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 88]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Imported Cloth ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bāhitikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn88){.blurb-link}
:   [King Pasenadi takes a chance to visit Venerable Ānanda, where he
    asks about skillful and unskillful behavior, and what is praised by
    the Buddha. He offers Ānanda a valuable cloth in
    gratitude.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 89]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Shrines to the Teaching ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dhammacetiyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn89){.blurb-link}
:   [King Pasenadi, near the end of his life, visits the Buddha, and
    shows moving devotion and love for his teacher.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 90]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Kaṇṇakatthala ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kaṇṇakatthalasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn90){.blurb-link}
:   [King Pasenadi questions the Buddha on miscellaneous matters: caste,
    omniscience, and the gods among them.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Brahmins ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Brāhmaṇavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn-brahmanavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha engages with the powerful caste of brahmins, contesting
    their claims to spiritual authority.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 91]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Brahmāyu ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Brahmāyusutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn91){.blurb-link}
:   [The oldest and most respected brahmin of the age sends a student to
    examine the Buddha, and he spends several months following his every
    move before reporting back. Convinced that the Buddha fulfills an
    ancient prophecy of the Great Man, the brahmin becomes his
    disciple.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 92]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Sela ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Selasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn92){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmanical ascetic named Keṇiya invites the entire Saṅgha for a
    meal. When the brahmin Sela sees what is happening, he visits the
    Buddha and expresses his delight in a moving series of devotional
    verses.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 93]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Assalāyana ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Assalāyanasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn93){.blurb-link}
:   [A precocious brahmin student is encouraged against his wishes to
    challenge the Buddha on the question of caste. His reluctance turns
    out to be justified.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 94]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Ghoṭamukha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ghoṭamukhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn94){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmin denies that there is such a thing as a principled
    renunciate life, but Venerable Udena persuades him
    otherwise.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 95]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Caṅkī ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Caṅkīsutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn95){.blurb-link}
:   [The reputed brahmin Caṅkī goes with a large group to visit the
    Buddha, despite the reservations of other brahmins. A precocious
    student challenges the Buddha, affirming the validity of the Vedic
    scriptures. The Buddha gives a detailed explanation of how true
    understanding gradually emerges through spiritual
    education.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 96]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Esukārī ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Esukārīsutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn96){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmin claims that one deserves service and privilege depending
    on caste, but the Buddha counters that it is conduct, not caste,
    that show a person's worth.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 97]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Dhanañjāni ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dhanañjānisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn97){.blurb-link}
:   [A corrupt tax-collector is redeemed by his encounter with Venerable
    Sāriputta.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 98]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Vāseṭṭha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vāseṭṭhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn98){.blurb-link}
:   [Two brahmin students ask the Buddha about what makes a brahmin:
    birth or deeds? the Buddha points out that, while the species of
    animals are determined by birth, for humans what matters is how you
    chose to live. This discourse anticipates the modern view that there
    are no such things as clearly defined racial differences among
    humans.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 99]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Subha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Subhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn99){.blurb-link}
:   [Working hard is not valuable in and of itself; what matters is the
    outcome. And just as in lay life, spiritual practice may or may not
    lead to fruitful results.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 100]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn100){.blurb-link}
:   [Angered by the devotion of a brahmin lady, a brahmin visits the
    Buddha. He positions himself against traditionalists and
    rationalists, as someone whose teaching is based on direct
    experience.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter Beginning With Devadaha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Devadahavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn-devadahavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Diverse teachings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 101]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Devadaha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Devadahasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn101){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha tackles a group of Jain ascetics, pressing them on their
    claim to be practicing to end all suffering by self-mortification.
    He points out a series of fallacies in their logic, and explains his
    own middle way.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 102]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Five and Three ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Pañcattayasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn102){.blurb-link}
:   [A middle length version of the more famous Brahmajāla Sutta (DN1),
    this surveys a range of speculative views and dismisses them
    all.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 103]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Is This What You Think Of Me? ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kintisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn103){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha teaches the monks to not dispute about the fundamental
    teachings, but to always strive for harmony.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 104]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Sāmagāma ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sāmagāmasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn104){.blurb-link}
:   [Hearing of the death of the Jain leader Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the
    Buddha encourages the Saṅgha to swiftly resolve any disputes. He
    lays down a series of seven methods for resolving disputes. These
    form the foundation for the monastic code.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 105]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Sunakkhatta ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sunakkhattasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn105){.blurb-link}
:   [Not all of those who claim to be awakened are genuine. The Buddha
    teaches how true spiritual progress depends on an irreversible
    letting go of the forces that lead to suffering.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 106]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Conducive to the Imperturbable ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Āneñjasappāyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn106){.blurb-link}
:   [Beginning with profound meditation absorption, the Buddha goes on
    to deeper and deeper levels, showing how insight on this basis leads
    to the detaching of consciousness from any form of
    rebirth.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 107]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Moggallāna the Accountant ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Gaṇakamoggallānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn107){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha compares the training of an accountant with the step by
    step spiritual path of his followers. But even with such a well
    explained path, the Buddha can only show the way, and it is up to us
    to walk it.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 108]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Moggallāna the Guardian ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Gopakamoggallānasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn108){.blurb-link}
:   [Amid rising military tensions after the Buddha's death, Venerable
    Ānanda is questioned about how the Saṅgha planned to continue in
    their teacher's absence. As the Buddha refused to appoint a
    successor, the teaching and practice that he laid down become the
    teacher, and the Saṅgha resolves issues by
    consensus.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 109]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Full-Moon Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāpuṇṇamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn109){.blurb-link}
:   [On a lovely full moon night, one of the mendicants presents the
    Buddha with a series of questions that go to the heart of the
    teaching. But when he hears of the doctrine of not-self, another
    mendicant is unable to grasp the meaning.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 110]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Full-Moon Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷapuṇṇamasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn110){.blurb-link}
:   [A good person is able to understand a bad person, but not vice
    versa.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter Beginning with One By One ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anupadavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn-anupadavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Many of the discourses in this chapter delve into complex and
    analytical presentations of core teachings. It includes important
    discourses on meditation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 111]{.blurb-item .acronym} [One by One ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anupadasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn111){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha describes in technical detail the process of insight of
    Venerable Sāriputta. Many ideas and terms in this text anticipate
    the Abhidhamma.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 112]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Sixfold Purification ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Chabbisodhanasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn112){.blurb-link}
:   [If someone claims to be awakened, their claim should be
    interrogated with a detailed series of detailed questions. Only if
    they can answer them clearly should the claim be
    accepted.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 113]{.blurb-item .acronym} [A True Person ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sappurisasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn113){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains that a truly good person does not disparage
    others or feel superior because of their
    attainment.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 114]{.blurb-item .acronym} [What Should and Should Not Be Cultivated ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Sevitabbāsevitabbasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn114){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha sets up a framework on things to be cultivated or
    avoided, and Venerable Sāriputta volunteers to
    elaborate.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 115]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Many Elements ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bahudhātukasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn115){.blurb-link}
:   [Beginning by praising a wise person, the Buddha goes on to explain
    that one becomes wise by inquiring into the elements, sense fields,
    dependent origination, and what is possible and
    impossible.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 116]{.blurb-item .acronym} [At Isigili ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Isigilisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn116){.blurb-link}
:   [Reflecting on the changes that even geographical features undergo,
    the Buddha then recounts the names of sages of the past who have
    lived in Mount Isigili near Rājagaha.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 117]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Forty ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahācattārīsakasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn117){.blurb-link}
:   [A discourse on the prerequisites of right samādhi that emphasizes
    the interrelationship and mutual support of all the factors of the
    eightfold path.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 118]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Mindfulness of Breathing ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ānāpānassatisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn118){.blurb-link}
:   [Surrounded by many well-practiced mendicants, the Buddha teaches
    mindfulness of breathing in detail, showing how it relates to the
    four kinds of mindfulness meditation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 119]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Mindfulness of the Body ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Kāyagatāsatisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn119){.blurb-link}
:   [This focuses on the first aspect of mindfulness meditation, the
    observation of the body. This set of practices, simple as they seem,
    have far-reaching benefits.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 120]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Rebirth by Choice ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saṅkhārupapattisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn120){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains how one can make a wish to be reborn in
    different realms.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter Beginning with Emptiness ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Suññatavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn-sunnatavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Named after the first discourses, which deal with emptiness, this
    chapter presents less analytical and more narrative
    texts.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 121]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷasuññatasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn121){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha describes his own practice of the meditation on
    emptiness.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 122]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on Emptiness ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsuññatasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn122){.blurb-link}
:   [A group of mendicants have taken to socializing too much, so the
    Buddha teaches on the importance of seclusion in order to enter
    fully into emptiness.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 123]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Incredible and Amazing ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Acchariyaabbhutasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn123){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Ānanda is invited by the Buddha to speak on the Buddha's
    amazing qualities, and proceeds to list a series of apparently
    miraculous events accompanying his birth. The Buddha caps it off by
    explaining what he thinks is really amazing about
    himself.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 124]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Bakkula ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bākulasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn124){.blurb-link}
:   [Venerable Bakkula, regarded as the healthiest of the mendicants,
    explains to an old friend his strict and austere practice. The
    unusual form of this discourse suggests it was added to the canon
    some time after the Buddha's death.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 125]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Level of the Tamed ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dantabhūmisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn125){.blurb-link}
:   [A young monk is unable to persuade a prince of the blessings of
    peace of mind. The Buddha offers similes based on training an
    elephant that would have been successful, as this was a field the
    prince was familiar with.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 126]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Bhūmija ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bhūmijasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn126){.blurb-link}
:   [Success in the spiritual life does not depend on any vows you may
    or may not make, but on whether you practice well.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 127]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With Anuruddha ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anuruddhasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn127){.blurb-link}
:   [A lay person becomes confused when encouraged to develop the
    "limitless" and "expansive" liberations, and asks Venerable
    Anuruddha to explain whether they are the same or
    different.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 128]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Corruptions ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Upakkilesasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn128){.blurb-link}
:   [A second discourse set at the quarrel of Kosambi, this depicts the
    Buddha, having failed to achieve reconciliation between the
    disputing mendicants, leaving the monastery. He spends time in the
    wilderness before encountering an inspiring community of practicing
    monks. There he discusses in detail obstacles to meditation that he
    encountered before awakening.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 129]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Foolish and the Astute ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bālapaṇḍitasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn129){.blurb-link}
:   [A fool suffers both in this life and the next, while the astute
    benefits in both respects.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 130]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Messengers of the Gods ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Devadūtasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn130){.blurb-link}
:   [Expanding on the previous, this discourse contains the most
    detailed descriptions of the horrors of hell.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on Analysis ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Vibhaṅgavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn-vibhangavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [A series of discourses presented as technical analyses of shorter
    teachings.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 131]{.blurb-item .acronym} [One Fine Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Bhaddekarattasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn131){.blurb-link}
:   [This discourse opens with a short but powerful set of verses
    extolling the benefits of insight into the here and now, followed by
    an explanation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 132]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Ānanda and One Fine Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Ānandabhaddekarattasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn132){.blurb-link}
:   [The same discourse as MN 131, but spoken by Venerable
    Ānanda.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 133]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Mahākaccāna and One Fine Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahākaccānabhaddekarattasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn133){.blurb-link}
:   [The verses from MN 131 are explained in a different way by
    Venerable Mahakaccāna.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 134]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Lomasakaṅgiya and One Fine Night ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Lomasakaṅgiyabhaddekarattasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn134){.blurb-link}
:   [A monk who does not know the verses from MN 131 is encouraged by a
    deity to learn them.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 135]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Analysis of Deeds ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷakammavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn135){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha explains to a brahmin how your deeds in past lives
    affect you in this life.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 136]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Longer Analysis of Deeds ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahākammavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn136){.blurb-link}
:   [Confronted with an overly simplistic version of his own teachings,
    the Buddha emphasizes the often overlooked nuances and
    qualifications in how karma plays out.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 137]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Analysis of the Six Sense Fields ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saḷāyatanavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn137){.blurb-link}
:   [A detailed analysis of the six senses and the relation to emotional
    and cognitive processes.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 138]{.blurb-item .acronym} [A Summary Recital and its Analysis ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Uddesavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn138){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha gives a brief and enigmatic statement on the ways
    consciousness may become attached. Venerable Mahākaccāna is invited
    by the mendicants to draw out the implications.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 139]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Analysis of Non-Conflict ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Araṇavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn139){.blurb-link}
:   [Achieving peace is no simple matter. The Buddha explains how to
    avoid conflict through contentment, right speech, understanding
    pleasure, and not insisting on local conventions.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 140]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Analysis of the Elements ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dhātuvibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn140){.blurb-link}
:   [While staying overnight in a potter's workshop, the Buddha has a
    chance encounter with a monk who does not recognize him. They have a
    long and profound discussion based on the four elements. This is one
    of the most insightful and moving discourses in the
    canon.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 141]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Analysis of the Truths ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saccavibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn141){.blurb-link}
:   [Expanding on the Buddha's first sermon, Venerable Sāriputta gives a
    detailed explanation of the four noble truths.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 142]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Analysis of Religious Donations ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn142){.blurb-link}
:   [When his step-mother Mahāpajāpatī wishes to offer him a robe for
    his personal use, the Buddha encourages her to offer it to the
    entire Saṅgha instead. He goes on to explain that the best kind of
    offering to the Saṅgha is one given to the dual community of monks
    and nuns, headed by the Buddha.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [The Chapter on the Six Senses]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Saḷāyatanavagga]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn-salayatanavagga){.blurb-link}
:   [Most discourses in this chapter deal with the six sense
    fields.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 143]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice to Anāthapiṇḍika ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Anāthapiṇḍikovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn143){.blurb-link}
:   [As the great lay disciple Anāthapiṇḍika lies dying, Venerable
    Sāriputta visits him and gives a powerful teaching on
    non-attachment.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 144]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice to Channa ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Channovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn144){.blurb-link}
:   [The monk Channa is suffering a painful terminal illness and wishes
    to take his own life.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 145]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice to Puṇṇa ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Puṇṇovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn145){.blurb-link}
:   [On the eve of his departure to a distant country, full of wild and
    unpredictable people, Venerable Puṇṇa is asked by the Buddha how he
    would respond if attacked there.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 146]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Advice from Nandaka ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Nandakovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn146){.blurb-link}
:   [When asked to teach the nuns, Venerable Nandaka proceeds by
    inviting them to engage with his discourse and ask if there is
    anything that needs further explanation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 147]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Shorter Advice to Rāhula ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Cūḷarāhulovādasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn147){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha takes Rāhula with him to a secluded spot in order to
    lead him on to liberation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 148]{.blurb-item .acronym} [Six By Six ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Chachakkasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn148){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha analyzes the six senses from six perspectives, and
    demonstrates the emptiness of all of them.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 149]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Great Discourse on What Relates to the Six Sense Fields ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Mahāsaḷāyatanikasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn149){.blurb-link}
:   [Explains how insight into the six senses is integrated with the
    eightfold path and leads to liberation.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 150]{.blurb-item .acronym} [With the People of Nagaravinda ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Nagaravindeyyasutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn150){.blurb-link}
:   [In discussion with a group of householders, the Buddha helps them
    to distinguish those spiritual practitioners who are truly worthy of
    respect.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 151]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Purification of Alms ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Piṇḍapātapārisuddhisutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn151){.blurb-link}
:   [The Buddha notices Venerable Sāriputta's glowing complexion, which
    is the result of his deep meditation. He then presents a series of
    reflections by which a mendicant can be sure that they are worthy of
    their alms-food.]{.blurb-content}

[[ [MN 152]{.blurb-item .acronym} [The Development of the Faculties ]{.blurb-item .translated-title} [Indriyabhāvanāsutta]{.blurb-item .root-title} ]{.blurb-label}](#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn152){.blurb-link}
:   [A brahmin teacher advocates that purification of the senses
    consists in simply avoiding seeing and hearing things. The Buddha
    explains that it is not about avoiding sense experience, but
    understanding it and learning to not be affected by sense
    experience.]{.blurb-content}

</article>

[]{#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml}

# The First Fifty {#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn-mulapannasa .section-title .heading}

## The Chapter on the Root of All Things {#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_mn-mulapariyayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn1">

### [MN 1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Root of All Things ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mūlapariyāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1](endnotes.xhtml_note-1){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Ukkaṭṭhā, in the Subhaga Forest at the root of a magnificent sal
tree.[2](endnotes.xhtml_note-2){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-2 .noteref
role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"[3](endnotes.xhtml_note-3){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-3
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you the explanation of the root of all
things.[4](endnotes.xhtml_note-4){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-4
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your minds well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and
is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the true
persons.[5](endnotes.xhtml_note-5){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-5
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They perceive earth as
earth.[6](endnotes.xhtml_note-6){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-6
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived earth as earth, they
conceive it to be earth, they conceive it in earth, they conceive it as
earth, they conceive that 'earth is mine', they approve
earth.[7](endnotes.xhtml_note-7){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-7
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I
say.[8](endnotes.xhtml_note-8){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-8 .noteref
role="doc-noteref"}

They perceive water as
water.[9](endnotes.xhtml_note-9){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-9
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived water as water, they
conceive it to be water ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely
understood it, I say.

They perceive fire as fire. Having perceived fire as fire, they conceive
it to be fire ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely
understood it, I say.

They perceive air as air. Having perceived air as air, they conceive it
to be air ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely understood
it, I say.

They perceive creatures as
creatures.[10](endnotes.xhtml_note-10){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-10
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived creatures as creatures,
they conceive it to be creatures ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive gods as
gods.[11](endnotes.xhtml_note-11){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-11
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived gods as gods, they
conceive it to be gods ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely
understood it, I say.

They perceive the Progenitor as the
Progenitor.[12](endnotes.xhtml_note-12){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-12
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the Progenitor as the
Progenitor, they conceive it to be the Progenitor ... Why is that?
Because they haven't completely understood it, I say.

They perceive Brahmā as
Brahmā.[13](endnotes.xhtml_note-13){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-13
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived Brahmā as Brahmā, they
conceive it to be Brahmā ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive those of streaming radiance as those of streaming
radiance.[14](endnotes.xhtml_note-14){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-14
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived those of streaming
radiance as those of streaming radiance, they conceive it to be those of
streaming radiance ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely
understood it, I say.

They perceive those of universal beauty as those of universal
beauty.[15](endnotes.xhtml_note-15){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-15
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But then they identify with those of
universal beauty ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely
understood it, I say.

They perceive those of abundant fruit as those of abundant
fruit.[16](endnotes.xhtml_note-16){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-16
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived those of abundant fruit as
those of abundant fruit, they conceive it to be those of abundant fruit
... Why is that? Because they haven't completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the Vanquisher as the
Vanquisher.[17](endnotes.xhtml_note-17){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-17
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the Vanquisher as the
Vanquisher, they conceive it to be the Vanquisher ... Why is that?
Because they haven't completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the dimension of infinite space as the dimension of
infinite
space.[18](endnotes.xhtml_note-18){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-18
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the dimension of infinite
space as the dimension of infinite space, they conceive it to be the
dimension of infinite space
...[19](endnotes.xhtml_note-19){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-19
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the dimension of infinite consciousness as the dimension
of infinite
consciousness.[20](endnotes.xhtml_note-20){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-20
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the dimension of infinite
consciousness as the dimension of infinite consciousness, they conceive
it to be the dimension of infinite consciousness ... Why is that?
Because they haven't completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the dimension of nothingness as the dimension of
nothingness.[21](endnotes.xhtml_note-21){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-21
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the dimension of
nothingness as the dimension of nothingness, they conceive it to be the
dimension of nothingness ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception as
the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[22](endnotes.xhtml_note-22){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-22
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception as the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they conceive it to be the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the seen as the
seen.[23](endnotes.xhtml_note-23){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-23
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the seen as the seen, they
conceive it to be the seen
...[24](endnotes.xhtml_note-24){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-24
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the heard as the
heard.[25](endnotes.xhtml_note-25){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-25
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the heard as the heard,
they conceive it to be the heard ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the thought as the
thought.[26](endnotes.xhtml_note-26){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-26
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the thought as the
thought, they conceive it to be the thought ... Why is that? Because
they haven't completely understood it, I say.

They perceive the known as the
known.[27](endnotes.xhtml_note-27){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-27
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived the known as the known,
they conceive it to be the known ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive oneness as
oneness.[28](endnotes.xhtml_note-28){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-28
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived oneness as oneness, they
conceive it to be oneness ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive diversity as
diversity.[29](endnotes.xhtml_note-29){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-29
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived diversity as diversity,
they conceive it to be diversity ... Why is that? Because they haven't
completely understood it, I say.

They perceive all as
all.[30](endnotes.xhtml_note-30){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-30
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived all as all, they conceive
it to be all ... Why is that? Because they haven't completely understood
it, I say.

They perceive extinguishment as
extinguishment.[31](endnotes.xhtml_note-31){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-31
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having perceived extinguishment as
extinguishment, they conceive it to be extinguishment, they conceive it
in extinguishment, they conceive it as extinguishment, they conceive
that 'extinguishment is mine', they approve extinguishment. Why is that?
Because they haven't completely understood it, I say.

A mendicant who is a trainee, who hasn't achieved their heart's desire,
but lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, directly
knows earth as
earth.[32](endnotes.xhtml_note-32){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-32
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having directly known earth as earth, let
them not conceive it to be earth, let them not conceive it in earth, let
them not conceive it as earth, let them not conceive that 'earth is
mine', let them not approve
earth.[33](endnotes.xhtml_note-33){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-33
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? So that they may completely
understand it, I say.

They directly know water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception
...[34](endnotes.xhtml_note-34){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-34
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the seen ... the heard ... the thought ...
the known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... They directly know
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, let them not conceive it to be extinguishment, let
them not conceive it in extinguishment, let them not conceive it as
extinguishment, let them not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', let
them not approve extinguishment. Why is that? So that they may
completely understand it, I say.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---directly knows
earth as
earth.[35](endnotes.xhtml_note-35){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-35
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having directly known earth as earth, they
do not conceive it to be earth, they do not conceive it in earth, they
do not conceive it as earth, they do not conceive that 'earth is mine',
they do not approve earth. Why is that? Because they have completely
understood it, I say.

They directly know water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... They directly know
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, they do not conceive it to be extinguishment, they do
not conceive it in extinguishment, they do not conceive it as
extinguishment, they do not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', they
do not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because they have completely
understood it, I say.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---directly knows
earth as earth. Having directly known earth as earth, they do not
conceive it to be earth, they do not conceive it in earth, they do not
conceive it as earth, they do not conceive that 'earth is mine', they do
not approve earth. Why is that? Because they're free of greed due to the
ending of
greed.[36](endnotes.xhtml_note-36){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-36
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They directly know water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... They directly know
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, they do not conceive it to be extinguishment, they do
not conceive it in extinguishment, they do not conceive it as
extinguishment, they do not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', they
do not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because they're free of
greed due to the ending of greed.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---directly knows
earth as earth. Having directly known earth as earth, they do not
conceive it to be earth, they do not conceive it in earth, they do not
conceive it as earth, they do not conceive that 'earth is mine', they do
not approve earth. Why is that? Because they're free of hate due to the
ending of hate.

They directly know water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... They directly know
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, they do not conceive it to be extinguishment, they do
not conceive it in extinguishment, they do not conceive it as
extinguishment, they do not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', they
do not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because they're free of hate
due to the ending of hate.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---directly knows
earth as earth. Having directly known earth as earth, they do not
conceive it to be earth, they do not conceive it in earth, they do not
conceive it as earth, they do not conceive that 'earth is mine', they do
not approve earth. Why is that? Because they're free of delusion due to
the ending of delusion.

They directly know water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... They directly know
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, they do not conceive it to be extinguishment, they do
not conceive it in extinguishment, they do not conceive it as
extinguishment, they do not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', they
do not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because they're free of
delusion due to the ending of delusion.

The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha directly
knows earth as
earth.[37](endnotes.xhtml_note-37){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-37
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having directly known earth as earth, he
does not conceive it to be earth, he does not conceive it in earth, he
does not conceive it as earth, he does not conceive that 'earth is
mine', he does not approve earth. Why is that? Because the Realized One
has completely understood it to the end, I
say.[38](endnotes.xhtml_note-38){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-38
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He directly knows water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... He directly knows
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, he does not conceive it to be extinguishment, he does
not conceive it in extinguishment, he does not conceive it as
extinguishment, he does not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', he
does not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because the Realized One
has completely understood it to the end, I say.

The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha directly
knows earth as earth. Having directly known earth as earth, he does not
conceive it to be earth, he does not conceive it in earth, he does not
conceive it as earth, he does not conceive that 'earth is mine', he does
not approve earth. Why is that? Because he has understood that approval
is the root of
suffering,[39](endnotes.xhtml_note-39){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-39
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and that rebirth comes from continued
existence; whoever has come to be gets old and
dies.[40](endnotes.xhtml_note-40){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-40
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why the Realized One---with the
ending, fading away, cessation, giving up, and letting go of all
cravings---has awakened to the supreme perfect awakening, I say.

He directly knows water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the
Progenitor ... Brahmā ... those of streaming radiance ... those replete
with glory ... those of abundant fruit ... the Vanquisher ... the
dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness
... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception ... the seen ... the heard ... the thought ... the
known ... oneness ... diversity ... all ... He directly knows
extinguishment as extinguishment. Having directly known extinguishment
as extinguishment, he does not conceive it to be extinguishment, he does
not conceive it in extinguishment, he does not conceive it as
extinguishment, he does not conceive that 'extinguishment is mine', he
does not approve extinguishment. Why is that? Because he has understood
that approval is the root of suffering, and that rebirth comes from
continued existence; whoever has come to be gets old and dies. That's
why the Realized One---with the ending, fading away, cessation, giving
up, and letting go of all cravings---has awakened to the supreme perfect
Awakening, I say."

That is what the Buddha said. But the mendicants did not approve what
the Buddha
said.[41](endnotes.xhtml_note-41){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-41
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn2">

### [MN 2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [All the Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sabbāsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[42](endnotes.xhtml_note-42){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-42
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you the explanation of the restraint of all
defilements.[43](endnotes.xhtml_note-43){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-43
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."[44](endnotes.xhtml_note-44){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-44
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows
and sees, not for one who does not know or
see.[45](endnotes.xhtml_note-45){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-45
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For one who knows and sees what? Rational
application of mind and irrational application of
mind.[46](endnotes.xhtml_note-46){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-46
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When you apply the mind irrationally,
defilements arise, and once arisen they
grow.[47](endnotes.xhtml_note-47){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-47
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When you apply the mind rationally,
defilements don't arise, and those that have already arisen are given
up.

Some defilements should be given up by seeing, some by restraint, some
by using, some by enduring, some by avoiding, some by dispelling, and
some by
developing.[48](endnotes.xhtml_note-48){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-48
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 1. Defilements Given Up by Seeing {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
seeing?[49](endnotes.xhtml_note-49){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-49
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take an unlearned ordinary person who has
not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the
teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are
neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true
persons.[50](endnotes.xhtml_note-50){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-50
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't understand to which things they
should apply the mind and to which things they should not apply the
mind. So they apply the mind to things they shouldn't and don't apply
the mind to things they should.

And what are the things to which they apply the mind but should not?
They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, give rise to
unarisen defilements and make arisen defilements grow: the defilements
of sensual
desire,[51](endnotes.xhtml_note-51){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-51
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These
are the things to which they apply the mind but should not.

And what are the things to which they do not apply the mind but should?
They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, do not give
rise to unarisen defilements and give up arisen defilements: the
defilements of sensual desire, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These
are the things to which they do not apply the mind but should.

Because of applying the mind to what they should not and not applying
the mind to what they should, unarisen defilements arise and arisen
defilements grow.

This is how they apply the mind irrationally: 'Did I exist in the past?
Did I not exist in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the
past? After being what, what did I become in the
past?[52](endnotes.xhtml_note-52){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-52
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Will I exist in the future? Will I not
exist in the future? What will I be in the future? How will I be in the
future? After being what, what will I become in the future?' Or they are
undecided about the present thus: 'Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I?
This sentient being---where did it come from? And where will it go?'

When they apply the mind irrationally in this way, one of the following
six views arises in them and is taken as a genuine
fact.[53](endnotes.xhtml_note-53){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-53
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The view: 'My self
survives.'[54](endnotes.xhtml_note-54){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-54
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The view: 'My self does not survive.' The
view: 'I perceive the self with the
self.'[55](endnotes.xhtml_note-55){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-55
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The view: 'I perceive what is not-self with
the self.'[56](endnotes.xhtml_note-56){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-56
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The view: 'I perceive the self with what is
not-self.'[57](endnotes.xhtml_note-57){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-57
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or they have such a view: 'This self of
mine is he, the speaker, the knower who experiences the results of good
and bad deeds in all the different realms. This self is permanent,
everlasting, eternal, and imperishable, and will last forever and
ever.'[58](endnotes.xhtml_note-58){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-58
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called a misconception, the thicket
of views, the desert of views, the twist of views, the dodge of views,
the fetter of
views.[59](endnotes.xhtml_note-59){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-59
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} An unlearned ordinary person who is
fettered by views is not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

But take a learned noble disciple who has seen the noble ones, and is
skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true
persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true
persons. They understand to which things they should apply the mind and
to which things they should not apply the mind. So they apply the mind
to things they should and don't apply the mind to things they shouldn't.

And what are the things to which they don't apply the mind and should
not? They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, give
rise to unarisen defilements and make arisen defilements grow: the
defilements of sensual desire, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These
are the things to which they don't apply the mind and should not.

And what are the things to which they do apply the mind and should? They
are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, do not give rise
to unarisen defilements and give up arisen defilements: the defilements
of sensual desire, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are the
things to which they do apply the mind and should.

Because of not applying the mind to what they should not and applying
the mind to what they should, unarisen defilements don't arise and
arisen defilements are given up.

They rationally apply the mind: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.[60](endnotes.xhtml_note-60){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-60
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And as they do so, they give up three
fetters: substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and
observances.[61](endnotes.xhtml_note-61){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-61
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are called the defilements that
should be given up by seeing.

#### 2. Defilements Given Up by Restraint {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
restraint?[62](endnotes.xhtml_note-62){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-62
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take a mendicant who, reflecting
rationally, lives restraining the faculty of the eye. For the
distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who
lives without restraint of the eye faculty do not arise when there is
such
restraint.[63](endnotes.xhtml_note-63){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-63
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Reflecting rationally, they live
restraining the faculty of the ear ... the nose ... the tongue ... the
body ... the mind. For the distressing and feverish defilements that
might arise in someone who lives without restraint of the mind faculty
do not arise when there is such
restraint.[64](endnotes.xhtml_note-64){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-64
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without restraint do not arise when there is such restraint.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by restraint.

#### 3. Defilements Given Up by Using {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
using?[65](endnotes.xhtml_note-65){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-65
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take a mendicant who, reflecting
rationally, makes use of robes: 'Only for the sake of warding off cold
and heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; and for covering up the private parts.'

Reflecting rationally, they make use of almsfood: 'Not for fun,
indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to
avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put
an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will
have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable
abiding.'[66](endnotes.xhtml_note-66){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-66
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Reflecting rationally, they make use of lodgings: 'Only for the sake of
warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and
to enjoy retreat.'

Reflecting rationally, they make use of medicines and supplies for the
sick: 'Only for the sake of warding off the pains of illness and to
promote good
health.'[67](endnotes.xhtml_note-67){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-67
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without using these things do not arise when they are used.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by using.

#### 4. Defilements Given Up by Enduring {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
enduring?[68](endnotes.xhtml_note-68){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-68
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take a mendicant who, reflecting
rationally, endures cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. They endure the
touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. They endure rude
and unwelcome criticism. And they put up with physical pain---sharp,
severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening.

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without enduring these things do not arise when they are
endured. These are called the defilements that should be given up by
enduring.

#### 5. Defilements Given Up by Avoiding {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
avoiding?[69](endnotes.xhtml_note-69){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-69
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take a mendicant who, reflecting
rationally, avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild ox, a wild dog,
a snake, a stump, thorny ground, a pit, a cliff, a swamp, and a sewer.
Reflecting rationally, they avoid sitting on inappropriate seats,
walking in inappropriate neighborhoods, and mixing with bad
friends---whatever sensible spiritual companions would believe to be a
bad
setting.[70](endnotes.xhtml_note-70){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-70
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without avoiding these things do not arise when they are
avoided. These are called the defilements that should be given up by
avoiding.

#### 6. Defilements Given Up by Dispelling {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
dispelling?[71](endnotes.xhtml_note-71){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-71
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Take a mendicant who, reflecting
rationally, doesn't tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that
has arisen, but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and
obliterates it. They don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that
have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and
obliterate them.

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without dispelling these things do not arise when they are
dispelled. These are called the defilements that should be given up by
dispelling.

#### 7. Defilements Given Up by Developing {.subheading}

And what are the defilements that should be given up by
developing?[72](endnotes.xhtml_note-72){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-72
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant, reflecting
rationally, develops the awakening factors of
mindfulness,[73](endnotes.xhtml_note-73){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-73
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting
go.[74](endnotes.xhtml_note-74){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-74
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone
who lives without developing these things do not arise when they are
developed. These are called the defilements that should be given up by
developing.

Now, take a mendicant who, by seeing, has given up the defilements that
should be given up by seeing. By restraint, they've given up the
defilements that should be given up by restraint. By using, they've
given up the defilements that should be given up by using. By enduring,
they've given up the defilements that should be given up by enduring. By
avoiding, they've given up the defilements that should be given up by
avoiding. By dispelling, they've given up the defilements that should be
given up by dispelling. By developing, they've given up the defilements
that should be given up by
developing.[75](endnotes.xhtml_note-75){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-75
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're called a mendicant who lives having
restrained all defilements, who has cut off craving, untied the fetters,
and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering."[76](endnotes.xhtml_note-76){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-76
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn3">

### [MN 3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Heirs in the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammadāyādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, be my heirs in the teaching, not in things of the
flesh.[77](endnotes.xhtml_note-77){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-77
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Out of sympathy for you, I think, 'How can
my disciples become heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh?'

If you become heirs in things of the flesh, not in the teaching, that
will make you liable to the
accusation:[78](endnotes.xhtml_note-78){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-78
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Teacher's disciples live as heirs in
things of the flesh, not in the teaching.' And it will make me liable to
the accusation: 'The Teacher's disciples live as heirs in things of the
flesh, not in the teaching.'

If you become heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh, that
will make you not liable to the accusation: 'The Teacher's disciples
live as heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh.' And it will
make me not liable to the accusation: 'The Teacher's disciples live as
heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh.'

So, mendicants, be my heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh.
Out of sympathy for you, I think, 'How can my disciples become heirs in
the teaching, not in things of the flesh?'

Suppose that I had eaten and refused more food, being full, and having
had as much as I
needed.[79](endnotes.xhtml_note-79){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-79
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there was some extra almsfood that was
going to be thrown away. Then two mendicants were to come who were weak
with hunger. I'd say to them, 'Mendicants, I have eaten and refused more
food, being full, and having had as much as I need. And there is this
extra almsfood that's going to be thrown away. Eat it if you like.
Otherwise I'll throw it out where there is little that grows, or drop it
into water that has no living creatures.'

Then one of those mendicants thought, 'The Buddha has eaten and refused
more food. And he has some extra almsfood that's going to be thrown
away. If we don't eat it he'll throw it away. But the Buddha has also
said: "Be my heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh." And
almsfood is one of the things of the flesh. Instead of eating this
almsfood, why don't I spend this day and night weak with hunger?' And
that's what they did.

Then the second of those mendicants thought, 'The Buddha has eaten and
refused more food. And he has some extra almsfood that's going to be
thrown away. If we don't eat it he'll throw it away. Why don't I eat
this almsfood, then spend the day and night having got rid of my hunger
and weakness?' And that's what they did.

Even though that mendicant, after eating the almsfood, spent the day and
night rid of hunger and weakness, it is the former mendicant who is more
worthy of respect and praise. Why is that? Because for a long time that
will conduce to that mendicant being of few wishes, content,
self-effacing, unburdensome, and
energetic.[80](endnotes.xhtml_note-80){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-80
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So, mendicants, be my heirs in the teaching, not in things of the flesh.
Out of sympathy for you, I think, 'How can my disciples become heirs in
the teaching, not in things of the flesh?'"

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Sāriputta said to the
mendicants,[81](endnotes.xhtml_note-81){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-81
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, how do the disciples of a Teacher who lives in seclusion not
train in seclusion? And how do they train in
seclusion?"[82](endnotes.xhtml_note-82){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-82
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May Venerable
Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, how do the disciples of a Teacher who lives in seclusion not
train in seclusion? The disciples of a teacher who lives in seclusion do
not train in seclusion. They don't give up what the Teacher tells them
to give up. They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion. In this case, the senior mendicants should be
criticized on three
grounds.[83](endnotes.xhtml_note-83){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-83
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The disciples of a teacher who lives in
seclusion do not train in seclusion.' This is the first ground. 'They
don't give up what the Teacher tells them to give up.' This is the
second ground. 'They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion.' This is the third ground. The senior mendicants
should be criticized on these three grounds. In this case, the middle
mendicants[84](endnotes.xhtml_note-84){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-84
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and the junior mendicants should be
criticized on the same three
grounds.[85](endnotes.xhtml_note-85){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-85
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how the disciples of a Teacher who
lives in seclusion do not train in seclusion.

And how do the disciples of a teacher who lives in seclusion train in
seclusion? The disciples of a teacher who lives in seclusion train in
seclusion. They give up what the Teacher tells them to give up. They're
not indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion.
In this case, the senior mendicants should be praised on three grounds.
'The disciples of a teacher who lives in seclusion train in seclusion.'
This is the first ground. 'They give up what the Teacher tells them to
give up.' This is the second ground. 'They're not indulgent and slack,
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion.' This is the third ground.
The senior mendicants should be praised on these three grounds. In this
case, the middle mendicants and the junior mendicants should be praised
on the same three grounds. This is how the disciples of a Teacher who
lives in seclusion train in seclusion.

The bad thing here is greed and hate. There is a middle way of practice
for giving up greed and hate. It gives vision and knowledge, and leads
to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and
extinguishment.[86](endnotes.xhtml_note-86){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-86
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is that middle way of practice? It
is simply this noble eightfold path, that
is:[87](endnotes.xhtml_note-87){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-87
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion. This is that middle way of practice, which gives vision
and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and
extinguishment.

The bad thing here is anger and acrimony. ... disdain and contempt ...
jealousy and stinginess ... deceit and deviousness ... obstinacy and
aggression ... conceit and arrogance ... vanity and negligence. There is
a middle way of practice for giving up vanity and negligence. It gives
vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening,
and extinguishment. And what is that middle way of practice? It is
simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. This is that middle way of practice,
which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge,
awakening, and extinguishment."

This is what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the mendicants
approved what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="mn4">

### [MN 4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fear and Dread ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayabheravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with
him.[88](endnotes.xhtml_note-88){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-88
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, those gentlemen who have gone forth out of faith from
the lay life to homelessness out of faith in you have Mister Gotama to
lead the way, help them out, and give them
encouragement.[89](endnotes.xhtml_note-89){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-89
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And those people follow Mister Gotama's
example."[90](endnotes.xhtml_note-90){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-90
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That's so true, brahmin! Everything you say is true, brahmin!"

"But Mister Gotama, remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest are
challenging. It's hard to maintain seclusion and hard to find joy in
solitude. The forests seem to rob the mind of a mendicant who isn't
immersed in samādhi."

"That's so true, brahmin! Everything you say is true, brahmin!

Before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I too
thought,[91](endnotes.xhtml_note-91){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-91
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest are challenging. It's hard to maintain seclusion and hard to find
joy in solitude. The forests seem to rob the mind of a mendicant who
isn't immersed in samādhi.'

Then I thought, 'There are ascetics and brahmins with unpurified conduct
of body, speech, and mind who frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Those ascetics and brahmins summon unskillful fear and
dread because of these defects in their
conduct.[92](endnotes.xhtml_note-92){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-92
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I don't frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest with unpurified conduct of body, speech, and
mind. My conduct is purified. I am one of those noble ones who frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest with purified conduct
of body, speech, and mind.' Seeing this purity of conduct in myself I
felt even more unruffled about staying in the
forest.[93](endnotes.xhtml_note-93){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-93
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then I thought, 'There are ascetics and brahmins with unpurified
livelihood who frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. Those ascetics and brahmins summon unskillful fear and dread
because of these defects in their livelihood. But I don't frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest with unpurified
livelihood. My livelihood is purified. I am one of those noble ones who
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest with purified
livelihood.'[94](endnotes.xhtml_note-94){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-94
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing this purity of livelihood in myself
I felt even more unruffled about staying in the forest.

Then I thought, 'There are ascetics and brahmins full of desire for
sensual pleasures, with acute lust ... I am not full of desire ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins full of ill will, with malicious
intentions ... I have a heart full of love ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins overcome with dullness and drowsiness
... I am free of dullness and drowsiness ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are restless, with no peace of mind
... My mind is peaceful ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are doubting and uncertain ... I've
gone beyond doubt ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who glorify themselves and put others
down ... I don't glorify myself and put others down ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are cowardly and craven ... I don't
get startled ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy possessions, honor, and
popularity ... I have few wishes ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are lazy and lack energy ... I am
energetic ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are unmindful and lack situational
awareness ... I am mindful ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who lack immersion, with straying minds
...[95](endnotes.xhtml_note-95){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-95
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I am accomplished in immersion ...'

'There are ascetics and brahmins who are witless and stupid who frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Those ascetics and
brahmins summon unskillful fear and dread because of the defects of
witlessness and stupidity. But I don't frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest witless and stupid. I am accomplished in
wisdom. I am one of those noble ones who frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest accomplished in wisdom.' Seeing this
accomplishment of wisdom in myself I felt even more unruffled about
staying in the forest.

Then I thought, 'There are certain nights that are recognized as
specially portentous: the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the
fortnight.[96](endnotes.xhtml_note-96){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-96
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} On such nights, why don't I stay in
awe-inspiring and hair-raising shrines in parks, forests, and trees? In
such lodgings, hopefully I might see that fear and dread.' Some time
later, that's what I did. As I was staying there a deer came by, or a
peacock snapped a twig, or the wind rustled the leaves. Then I thought,
'Is this that fear and dread coming?' Then I thought, 'Why do I always
meditate expecting that fear to come? Why don't I get rid of that fear
and dread just as it comes, while remaining just as I am?' Then that
fear and dread came upon me as I was walking. I didn't stand still or
sit down or lie down until I had got rid of that fear and dread while
walking. Then that fear and dread came upon me as I was standing. I
didn't walk or sit down or lie down until I had got rid of that fear and
dread while standing. Then that fear and dread came upon me as I was
sitting. I didn't lie down or stand still or walk until I had got rid of
that fear and dread while sitting. Then that fear and dread came upon me
as I was lying down. I didn't sit up or stand still or walk until I had
got rid of that fear and dread while lying down.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who perceive that it's day when in
fact it's night, or perceive that it's night when in fact it's
day.[97](endnotes.xhtml_note-97){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-97
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This meditation of theirs is delusional, I
say. I perceive that it's night when in fact it is night, and perceive
that it's day when in fact it is
day.[98](endnotes.xhtml_note-98){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-98
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And if there's anyone of whom it may be
rightly said that a being not liable to delusion has arisen in the world
for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the
world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans, it's
of me that this should be said.

My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established
and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was
immersed in
samādhi.[99](endnotes.xhtml_note-99){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-99
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[100](endnotes.xhtml_note-100){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-100
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[101](endnotes.xhtml_note-101){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-101
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And with the fading away of rapture, I
entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.'[102](endnotes.xhtml_note-102){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-102
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With the giving up of pleasure and pain,
and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I entered and remained
in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and
mindfulness.[103](endnotes.xhtml_note-103){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-103
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When my mind had become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection of past lives. I
recollected many kinds of past
lives.[104](endnotes.xhtml_note-104){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-104
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand
rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world
expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. I
remembered: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn here.' And so I recollected my many kinds of past lives,
with features and
details.[105](endnotes.xhtml_note-105){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-105
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act
out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose
to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings
are reborn according to their
deeds.[106](endnotes.xhtml_note-106){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-106
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements.[107](endnotes.xhtml_note-107){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-107
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.[108](endnotes.xhtml_note-108){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-108
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I truly understood: 'These are defilements'
... 'This is the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of
defilements' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
defilements'.[109](endnotes.xhtml_note-109){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-109
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance.[110](endnotes.xhtml_note-110){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-110
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When it was freed, I knew it was
freed.[111](endnotes.xhtml_note-111){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-111
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I understood: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this
place.'"[112](endnotes.xhtml_note-112){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-112
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the final watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

Brahmin, you might think: 'Perhaps the ascetic Gotama is not free of
greed, hate, and delusion even today, and that is why he still frequents
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.' But you should not
see it like this. I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest. I see a happy life for myself in the present,
and I have sympathy for future
generations."[113](endnotes.xhtml_note-113){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-113
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed, Mister Gotama has sympathy for future generations, since he is
a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. Excellent, Mister Gotama!
Excellent, Mister Gotama! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge
to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[114](endnotes.xhtml_note-114){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-114
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn5">

### [MN 5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unblemished ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anaṅgaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.[115](endnotes.xhtml_note-115){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-115
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, these four people are found in the
world.[116](endnotes.xhtml_note-116){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-116
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? One person with a blemish
doesn't truly understand: 'There is a blemish in
me.'[117](endnotes.xhtml_note-117){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-117
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But another person with a blemish does
truly understand: 'There is a blemish in me.' One person without a
blemish doesn't truly understand: 'There is no blemish in me.' But
another person without a blemish does truly understand: 'There is no
blemish in me.' In this case, of the two persons with a blemish, the one
who doesn't understand is said to be worse, while the one who does
understand is better. And of the two persons without a blemish, the one
who doesn't understand is said to be worse, while the one who does
understand is better."

When he said this, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to him:

"What is the cause, Reverend Sāriputta, what is the reason why, of the
two persons with a blemish, one is said to be worse and one better? And
what is the cause, what is the reason why, of the two persons without a
blemish, one is said to be worse and one better?"

"Reverends, take the case of the person who has a blemish and does not
understand it. You can expect that they won't generate enthusiasm, make
an effort, or rouse up energy to give up that
blemish.[118](endnotes.xhtml_note-118){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-118
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they will die with greed, hate, and
delusion, blemished, with a corrupted mind. Suppose a bronze dish was
brought from a shop or smithy covered with dirt or stains. And the
owners neither used it or had it cleaned, but kept it in a dirty place.
Over time, wouldn't that bronze dish get even dirtier and more stained?"

"Yes, reverend."

"In the same way, take the case of the person who has a blemish and does
not understand it. You can expect that ... they will die with a
corrupted mind.

Take the case of the person who has a blemish and does understand it.
You can expect that they will generate enthusiasm, make an effort, and
rouse up energy to give up that blemish. And they will die without
greed, hate, and delusion, unblemished, with an uncorrupted mind.
Suppose a bronze dish was brought from a shop or smithy covered with
dirt or stains. But the owners used it and had it cleaned, and didn't
keep it in a dirty place. Over time, wouldn't that bronze dish get
cleaner and brighter?"

"Yes, reverend."

"In the same way, take the case of the person who has a blemish and does
understand it. You can expect that ... they will die with an uncorrupted
mind.

Take the case of the person who doesn't have a blemish but does not
understand it. You can expect that they will focus on the feature of
beauty, and because of that, lust will infect their
mind.[119](endnotes.xhtml_note-119){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-119
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they will die with greed, hate, and
delusion, blemished, with a corrupted mind. Suppose a bronze dish was
brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright. And the owners neither
used it or had it cleaned, but kept it in a dirty place. Over time,
wouldn't that bronze dish get dirtier and more stained?"

"Yes, reverend."

"In the same way, take the case of the person who has no blemish and
does not understand it. You can expect that ... they will die with a
corrupted mind.

Take the case of the person who doesn't have a blemish and does
understand it. You can expect that they won't focus on the feature of
beauty, and because of that, lust won't infect their mind. And they will
die without greed, hate, and delusion, unblemished, with an uncorrupted
mind. Suppose a bronze dish was brought from a shop or smithy clean and
bright. And the owners used it and had it cleaned, and didn't keep it in
a dirty place. Over time, wouldn't that bronze dish get cleaner and
brighter?"

"Yes, reverend."

"In the same way, take the case of the person who doesn't have a blemish
and does understand it. You can expect that ... they will die with an
uncorrupted mind.

This is the cause, this is the reason why, of the two persons with a
blemish, one is said to be worse and one better. And this is the cause,
this is the reason why, of the two persons without a blemish, one is
said to be worse and one better."

"Reverend, the word 'blemish' is spoken
of.[120](endnotes.xhtml_note-120){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-120
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is 'blemish' a term for?"

"Reverend, 'blemish' is a term for the spheres of bad, unskillful
wishes.

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'If I commit an offense, I
hope the mendicants don't find
out!'[121](endnotes.xhtml_note-121){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-121
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that the mendicants do
find out that that mendicant has committed an offense. Thinking, 'The
mendicants have found out about my offense,' they get angry and bitter.
And that anger and that bitterness are both blemishes.

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'If I commit an offense, I
hope the mendicants accuse me in private, not in the middle of the
Saṅgha.'[122](endnotes.xhtml_note-122){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-122
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that the mendicants do
accuse that mendicant in the middle of the Saṅgha ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'If I commit an offense, I
hope I'm accused by a counterpart, not by someone who is not a
counterpart.'[123](endnotes.xhtml_note-123){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-123
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that someone who is not a
counterpart accuses that mendicant ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'Oh, I hope the Teacher
will teach the mendicants by repeatedly questioning me alone, not some
other mendicant.' But it's possible that the Teacher will teach the
mendicants by repeatedly questioning some other mendicant ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'Oh, I hope the mendicants
will enter the village for the meal putting me at the very front, not
some other
mendicant.'[124](endnotes.xhtml_note-124){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-124
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that the mendicants will
enter the village for the meal putting some other mendicant at the very
front ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'Oh, I hope that I alone
get the best seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in the
refectory, not some other mendicant.' But it's possible that some other
mendicant gets the best seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in
the refectory ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'I hope that I alone give
the verses of appreciation after eating in the refectory, not some other
mendicant.'[125](endnotes.xhtml_note-125){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-125
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that some other mendicant
gives the verses of appreciation after eating in the refectory ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'Oh, I hope that I might
teach the Dhamma to the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen in the
monastery, not some other
mendicant.'[126](endnotes.xhtml_note-126){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-126
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But it's possible that some other mendicant teaches the Dhamma ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'Oh, I hope that the
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will honor, respect, revere, and
venerate me alone, not some other mendicant.'

But it's possible that some other mendicant is honored, respected,
revered, and venerated ...

It's possible that some mendicant might wish: 'I hope I get the nicest
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, not
some other mendicant.' But it's possible that some other mendicant gets
the nicest robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick ...

Thinking, 'Some other mendicant has got the nicest robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick', they get angry and
bitter. And that anger and that bitterness are both blemishes.

'Blemish' is a term for these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes.

Suppose these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen and heard to be
not given up by a mendicant. Even though they dwell in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings, eat only almsfood, wander indiscriminately for
almsfood, wear rag robes, and wear shabby robes, their spiritual
companions don't honor, respect, revere, and venerate
them.[127](endnotes.xhtml_note-127){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-127
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? It's because these spheres of
bad, unskillful wishes are seen and heard to be not given up by that
venerable. Suppose a bronze dish was brought from a shop or smithy clean
and bright. The owners were to prepare it with the carcass of a snake, a
dog, or a human, cover it with a bronze lid, and parade it through the
market-place. When people saw it they'd say: 'My good man, what is it
that you're carrying like a precious treasure?' So they'd open up the
lid for people to look inside. But as soon as they saw it they were
filled with loathing, revulsion, and disgust. Not even those who were
hungry wanted to eat it, let alone those who had eaten.

In the same way, when these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen
and heard to be not given up by a mendicant ... their spiritual
companions don't honor, respect, revere, and venerate them. Why is that?
It's because these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen and heard
to be not given up by that venerable.

Suppose these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen and heard to be
given up by a mendicant. Even though they dwell within a village, accept
invitations to a meal, and wear robes offered by householders, their
spiritual companions honor, respect, revere, and venerate them. Why is
that? It's because these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen and
heard to be given up by that venerable. Suppose a bronze dish was
brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright. The owners were to
prepare it with boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out and
served with many soups and sauces, cover it with a bronze lid, and
parade it through the market-place. When people saw it they'd say: 'My
good man, what is it that you're carrying like a precious treasure?' So
they'd open up the lid for people to look inside. And as soon as they
saw it they were filled with liking, attraction, and relish. Even those
who had eaten wanted to eat it, let alone those who were hungry.

In the same way, when these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen
and heard to be given up by a mendicant ... their spiritual companions
honor, respect, revere, and venerate them. Why is that? It's because
these spheres of bad, unskillful wishes are seen and heard to be given
up by that venerable."

When he said this, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to him, "Reverend
Sāriputta, a simile strikes me."

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said Sāriputta.

"Reverend, this one time I was staying right here in Rājagaha, the
Mountainfold. Then I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and
robe, entered Rājagaha for alms. Now at that time Samīti of the
wainwrights was planing the rim of a chariot
wheel.[128](endnotes.xhtml_note-128){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-128
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Ājīvaka ascetic Paṇḍuputta, who was
formerly of the wainwrights, was standing
by,[129](endnotes.xhtml_note-129){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-129
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and this thought came to his mind: 'Oh, I
hope Samīti the wainwright planes out the crooks, bends, and flaws in
this rim. Then the rim will be rid of crooks, bends, and flaws, pure,
and consolidated in the
core.'[130](endnotes.xhtml_note-130){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-130
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And Samīti planed out the flaws in the rim
just as Paṇḍuputta thought. Then Paṇḍuputta expressed his gladness: 'He
planes like he knows my heart with his heart!'

In the same way, there are those faithless people who went forth from
the lay life to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood.
They're devious, deceitful, and sneaky. They're restless, insolent,
fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued. They do not guard their sense
doors or eat in moderation, and they are not dedicated to wakefulness.
They don't care about the ascetic life, and don't keenly respect the
training. They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion, lazy, and lacking energy. They're unmindful,
lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds,
witless and stupid. Venerable Sāriputta planes their faults with this
exposition of the teaching as if he knows my heart with his
heart\![131](endnotes.xhtml_note-131){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-131
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But there are those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness out of faith. They're not devious, deceitful, and sneaky.
They're not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued.
They guard their sense doors and eat in moderation, and they are
dedicated to wakefulness. They care about the ascetic life, and keenly
respect the training. They're not indulgent or slack, nor are they
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They're energetic and
determined. They're mindful, with situational awareness, immersion, and
unified minds; wise, not stupid. Hearing this exposition of the teaching
from Venerable Sāriputta, they drink it up and devour it, as it were.
And in speech and thought they say: 'It's good, sirs, that he draws his
spiritual companions away from the unskillful and establishes them in
the
skillful.'[132](endnotes.xhtml_note-132){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-132
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and had bathed their head. Presented with a garland of
lotuses, jasmine, or liana flowers, they would take them in both hands
and place them on the crown of the
head.[133](endnotes.xhtml_note-133){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-133
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, those gentlemen who went
forth from the lay life to homelessness out of faith ... say: 'It's
good, sirs, that he draws his spiritual companions away from the
unskillful and establishes them in the skillful.'" And so these two
spiritual giants agreed with each others' fine
words.[134](endnotes.xhtml_note-134){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-134
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn6">

### [MN 6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Might Wish ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ākaṅkheyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've
undertaken.[135](endnotes.xhtml_note-135){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-135
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A mendicant might wish: 'May I be liked and approved by my spiritual
companions, respected and admired.' So let them fulfill their precepts,
be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be
endowed with discernment, and frequent empty
huts.[136](endnotes.xhtml_note-136){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-136
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A mendicant might wish: 'May I receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.' So let them fulfill their
precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect
absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty
huts.[137](endnotes.xhtml_note-137){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-137
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A mendicant might wish: 'May the services of those whose robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be
very fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their
precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'When deceased family and relatives who have
passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very
fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over desire and discontent, and
may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having
mastered desire and discontent whenever they arose.' So let them fulfill
their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear
and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread
whenever they arose.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when I
want, without trouble or difficulty.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I have direct meditative experience of the
peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form.' So let them
fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I, with the ending of three fetters, become
a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, become a once-returner,
coming back to this world once only, then making an end of suffering.'
So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, be reborn spontaneously and become extinguished there, not
liable to return from that world.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing;
going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if
through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water;
walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the
sky like a bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so
mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm.'
So let them fulfill their precepts
...[138](endnotes.xhtml_note-138){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-138
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A mendicant might wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...[139](endnotes.xhtml_note-139){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-139
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A mendicant might wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my
mind.[140](endnotes.xhtml_note-140){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-140
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} May I understand mind with greed as "mind
with greed", and mind without greed as "mind without greed"; mind with
hate as "mind with hate", and mind without hate as "mind without hate";
mind with delusion as "mind with delusion", and mind without delusion as
"mind without delusion"; constricted mind as "constricted mind", and
scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive mind as "expansive mind",
and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind"; mind that is not supreme as
"mind that is not supreme", and mind that is supreme as "mind that is
supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi as "mind immersed in samādhi", and
mind not immersed in samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi"; freed
mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' So let them
fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I thus
recollect my many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.'[141](endnotes.xhtml_note-141){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-141
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place---and understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds: "These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and
they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of
body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had
right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their
body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm." And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds.'[142](endnotes.xhtml_note-142){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-142
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.'[143](endnotes.xhtml_note-143){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-143
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So let them fulfill their precepts, be
committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be
endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

'Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've undertaken.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn7">

### [MN 7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Cloth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vatthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a cloth that was dirty and soiled. No
matter what dye the dyer applied---whether blue or yellow or red or
magenta---it would look poorly dyed and impure in color. Why is that?
Because of the impurity of the cloth.

In the same way, when the mind is corrupt, a bad destiny is to be
expected.[144](endnotes.xhtml_note-144){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-144
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a cloth that was pure and
clean. No matter what dye the dyer applied---whether blue or yellow or
red or magenta---it would look well dyed and pure in color. Why is that?
Because of the purity of the cloth.

In the same way, when the mind isn't corrupt, a good destiny is to be
expected.

And what are the corruptions of the
mind?[145](endnotes.xhtml_note-145){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-145
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Covetousness and immoral greed, ill will,
anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deceit,
deviousness, obstinacy, aggression, conceit, arrogance, vanity, and
negligence are corruptions of the mind.

A mendicant who understands that covetousness and immoral greed are
corruptions of the mind gives them up. A mendicant who understands that
ill will ... negligence is a corruption of the mind gives it up.

When they have understood these corruptions of the mind for what they
are, and have given them up, they have experiential confidence in the
Buddha:[146](endnotes.xhtml_note-146){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-146
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened,
blessed.'[147](endnotes.xhtml_note-147){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-147
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for
themselves.'[148](endnotes.xhtml_note-148){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-148
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the
world.'[149](endnotes.xhtml_note-149){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-149
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When a mendicant has discarded, eliminated, released, given up, and
relinquished to this extent, thinking, 'I have experiential confidence
in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha,' they find inspiration in
the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching.
Thinking: 'I have discarded, eliminated, released, given up, and
relinquished to this extent,' they find inspiration in the meaning and
the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching. When they're
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when
they're blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi.[150](endnotes.xhtml_note-150){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-150
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When a mendicant of such ethics, such qualities, and such wisdom eats
boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out and served with many
soups and sauces, that is no obstacle for
them.[151](endnotes.xhtml_note-151){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-151
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Compare with cloth that is dirty and
soiled; it can be made pure and clean by pure water. Or unrefined gold,
which can be made pure and bright by a forge. In the same way, when a
mendicant of such ethics, such qualities, and such wisdom eats boiled
fine rice with the dark grains picked out and served with many soups and
sauces, that is no obstacle for them.

They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill
will.[152](endnotes.xhtml_note-152){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-152
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of compassion to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.[153](endnotes.xhtml_note-153){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-153
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate spreading a heart full of
rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.[154](endnotes.xhtml_note-154){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-154
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate spreading a heart full of
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.[155](endnotes.xhtml_note-155){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-155
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They understand: 'There is this, there is what is worse than this, there
is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of
perception.'[156](endnotes.xhtml_note-156){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-156
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is called a mendicant who is bathed with the inner
bathing."[157](endnotes.xhtml_note-157){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-157
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā was sitting not far
from the
Buddha.[158](endnotes.xhtml_note-158){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-158
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He said to the Buddha, "But does Mister
Gotama go to the river Bāhuka to bathe?"

"Brahmin, why go to the river Bāhuka? What can the river Bāhuka do?"

"Many people deem that the river Bāhukā leads to a heavenly world and
bestows merit. And many people wash off their bad deeds in the river
Bāhukā."[159](endnotes.xhtml_note-159){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-159
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha addressed Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā in verse:

> "The Bāhukā and the
> Adhikakkā,[160](endnotes.xhtml_note-160){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-160
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> at Gayā and the Sundarikā
> too,[161](endnotes.xhtml_note-161){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-161
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Sarasvatī and
> Payāga,[162](endnotes.xhtml_note-162){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-162
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the river
> Bāhumatī:[163](endnotes.xhtml_note-163){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-163
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> a fool can constantly plunge into them\
> but it won't purify their dark deeds.
>
> What can the Sundarikā do?\
> What the Payāga or the Bāhukā?\
> They can't cleanse a cruel and criminal person\
> from their bad deeds.
>
> For the pure in heart it's always\
> the spring festival or the
> sabbath.[164](endnotes.xhtml_note-164){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-164
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> For the pure in heart and clean of deed,\
> their vows will always be fulfilled.\
> It's here alone that you should bathe, brahmin,\
> making yourself a sanctuary for all
> creatures.[165](endnotes.xhtml_note-165){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-165
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> And if you speak no
> lies,[166](endnotes.xhtml_note-166){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-166
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> nor harm any living creature,\
> nor steal anything not given,\
> and you're faithful and not stingy:\
> what's the point of going to Gayā?\
> For any well may be your Gayā!"

When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā said to the
Buddha, "Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. May I receive the going forth, the ordination in Mister Gotama's
presence?"

And the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā received the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination,
Venerable Bhāradvāja, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="mn8">

### [MN 8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Self-Effacement ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sallekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.[167](endnotes.xhtml_note-167){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-167
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahācunda came out of retreat and
went to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha:[168](endnotes.xhtml_note-168){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-168
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, there are many different views that arise in the world connected
with theories of self or with theories of the
cosmos.[169](endnotes.xhtml_note-169){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-169
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How does a mendicant who is focusing on the
starting point give up and let go of these
views?"[170](endnotes.xhtml_note-170){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-170
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Cunda, there are many different views that arise in the world connected
with theories of self or with theories of the cosmos. A mendicant gives
up and lets go of these views by truly seeing with right wisdom where
they arise, where they settle in, and where they operate as: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.'[171](endnotes.xhtml_note-171){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-171
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that a certain mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, might enter and remain in
the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. They might think
they're practicing
self-effacement.[172](endnotes.xhtml_note-172){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-172
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But in the training of the Noble One these
are not called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'blissful meditations
in the present
life'.[173](endnotes.xhtml_note-173){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-173
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that some mendicant, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, might enter and remain in the second
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with
internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping
it connected. They might think they're practicing self-effacement. But
in the training of the Noble One these are not called 'self-effacement';
they're called 'blissful meditations in the present life'.

It's possible that some mendicant, with the fading away of rapture,
might enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' They might think they're practicing self-effacement. But in the
training of the Noble One these are not called 'self-effacement';
they're called 'blissful meditations in the present life'.

It's possible that some mendicant, with the giving up of pleasure and
pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, might enter and
remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure
equanimity and mindfulness. They might think they're practicing
self-effacement. But in the training of the Noble One these are not
called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'blissful meditations in the
present life'.

It's possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', might enter
and remain in the dimension of infinite space. They might think they're
practicing self-effacement. But in the training of the Noble One these
are not called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'peaceful meditations'.

It's possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', might enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. They might think
they're practicing self-effacement. But in the training of the Noble One
these are not called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'peaceful
meditations'.

It's possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', might
enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. They might think
they're practicing self-effacement. But in the training of the Noble One
these are not called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'peaceful
meditations'.

It's possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, might enter and remain in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. They might think they're practicing
self-effacement. But in the training of the Noble One these are not
called 'self-effacement'; they're called 'peaceful meditations'.

#### 1. The Exposition of Self-Effacement {.subheading}

Now, Cunda, you should work on self-effacement in each of the following
ways.[174](endnotes.xhtml_note-174){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-174
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will be cruel, but here we will not be
cruel.'[175](endnotes.xhtml_note-175){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-175
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill living
creatures.'[176](endnotes.xhtml_note-176){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-176
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will steal, but here we will not steal.'

'Others will be unchaste, but here we will not be unchaste.'

'Others will lie, but here we will not lie.'

'Others will speak divisively, but here we will not speak divisively.'

'Others will speak harshly, but here we will not speak harshly.'

'Others will talk nonsense, but here we will not talk nonsense.'

'Others will be covetous, but here we will not be covetous.'

'Others will have ill will, but here we will not have ill will.'

'Others will have wrong view, but here we will have right
view.'[177](endnotes.xhtml_note-177){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-177
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will have wrong thought, but here we will have right thought.'

'Others will have wrong speech, but here we will have right speech.'

'Others will have wrong action, but here we will have right action.'

'Others will have wrong livelihood, but here we will have right
livelihood.'

'Others will have wrong effort, but here we will have right effort.'

'Others will have wrong mindfulness, but here we will have right
mindfulness.'

'Others will have wrong immersion, but here we will have right
immersion.'

'Others will have wrong knowledge, but here we will have right
knowledge.'[178](endnotes.xhtml_note-178){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-178
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will have wrong freedom, but here we will have right freedom.'

'Others will be overcome with dullness and drowsiness, but here we will
be rid of dullness and
drowsiness.'[179](endnotes.xhtml_note-179){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-179
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will be restless, but here we will not be restless.'

'Others will have doubts, but here we will have gone beyond doubt.'

'Others will be irritable, but here we will be without
anger.'[180](endnotes.xhtml_note-180){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-180
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will be acrimonious, but here we will be without acrimony.'

'Others will be offensive, but here we will be inoffensive.'

'Others will be contemptuous, but here we will be without contempt.'

'Others will be jealous, but here we will be without jealousy.'

'Others will be stingy, but here we will be without stinginess.'

'Others will be devious, but here we will not be devious.'

'Others will be deceitful, but here we will not be deceitful.'

'Others will be pompous, but here we will not be pompous.'

'Others will be arrogant, but here we will not be arrogant.'

'Others will be hard to admonish, but here we will not be hard to
admonish.'[181](endnotes.xhtml_note-181){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-181
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will have bad friends, but here we will have good friends.'

'Others will be negligent, but here we will be diligent.'

'Others will be faithless, but here we will have
faith.'[182](endnotes.xhtml_note-182){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-182
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will be conscienceless, but here we will have a sense of
conscience.'[183](endnotes.xhtml_note-183){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-183
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Others will be imprudent, but here we will be prudent.'

'Others will be unlearned, but here we will be well learned.'

'Others will be lazy, but here we will be energetic.'

'Others will be unmindful, but here we will be mindful.'

'Others will be witless, but here we will be accomplished in wisdom.'

'Others will be attached to their own views, holding them tight, and
refusing to let go, but here we will not be attached to our own views,
not holding them tight, but will let them go
easily.'[184](endnotes.xhtml_note-184){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-184
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 2. Giving Rise to the Thought {.subheading}

Cunda, I say that even giving rise to the thought of skillful qualities
is very helpful, let alone following that path in body and
speech.[185](endnotes.xhtml_note-185){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-185
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why you should give rise to the
following thoughts. 'Others will be cruel, but here we will not be
cruel.' 'Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill
living creatures.' ... 'Others will be attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go, but here we will not be
attached to our own views, not holding them tight, but will let them go
easily.'

#### 3. Bypassing {.subheading}

Cunda, suppose there was a rough path and another smooth path to get
around
it.[186](endnotes.xhtml_note-186){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-186
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or suppose there was a rough ford and
another smooth ford to get around it. In the same way, a cruel
individual bypasses it by not being cruel. An individual who kills
bypasses it by not killing. ...

An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go, gets around it by not being attached to their
own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily.

#### 4. Going Up {.subheading}

Cunda, all unskillful qualities lead downwards, while all skillful
qualities lead
upwards.[187](endnotes.xhtml_note-187){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-187
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a cruel individual is led
upwards by not being cruel. An individual who kills is led upwards by
not killing ... An individual who is attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go, is led upwards by not being
attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go
easily.

#### 5. The Exposition by Extinguishment {.subheading}

If you're sinking in the mud yourself, Cunda, it is quite impossible for
you to pull out someone else who is sinking in the mud. But if you're
not sinking in the mud yourself, it is quite possible for you to pull
out someone else who is sinking in the mud. If you're not tamed,
trained, and quenched yourself, it is quite impossible for you to help
tame, train, and extinguish someone else. But if you are tamed, trained,
and quenched yourself, it is quite possible for you to help tame, train,
and extinguish someone
else.[188](endnotes.xhtml_note-188){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-188
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a cruel individual extinguishes it by not being cruel.
An individual who kills extinguishes it by not killing. ...

An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go, extinguishes it by not being attached to their
own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily.

So, Cunda, I've taught the expositions by way of self-effacement,
arising of thought, bypassing, going up, and
extinguishing.[189](endnotes.xhtml_note-189){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-189
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher
should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are these
roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption,
Cunda! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my
instruction."[190](endnotes.xhtml_note-190){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-190
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Mahācunda approved
what the Buddha said.

> Forty-four items have been
> stated,[191](endnotes.xhtml_note-191){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-191
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> organized into five sections.\
> "Effacement" is the name of this discourse,\
> which is deep as the ocean.

</article>
<article id="mn9">

### [MN 9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Right View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammādiṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There Sāriputta
addressed the
mendicants:[192](endnotes.xhtml_note-192){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-192
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, they speak of this thing called 'right view'. How do you
define a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who
has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true
teaching?"[193](endnotes.xhtml_note-193){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-193
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May Venerable
Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A noble disciple understands the unskillful and its root, and the
skillful and its
root.[194](endnotes.xhtml_note-194){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-194
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they've done this, they're defined as
a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has
experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true
teaching.[195](endnotes.xhtml_note-195){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-195
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But what is the unskillful and what is its root? And what is the
skillful and what is its root? Killing living creatures, stealing, and
sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical;
and covetousness, ill will, and wrong
view.[196](endnotes.xhtml_note-196){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-196
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the unskillful.

And what is the root of the unskillful? Greed, hate, and delusion. This
is called the root of the unskillful.

And what is the skillful? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing,
and sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right
view.[197](endnotes.xhtml_note-197){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-197
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the skillful.

And what is the root of the skillful? Contentment, love, and
understanding. This is called the root of the skillful.

A noble disciple understands in this way the unskillful and its root,
and the skillful and its root. They've completely given up the
underlying tendency to greed, got rid of the underlying tendency to
repulsion, and eradicated the underlying tendency to the view and
conceit 'I am'. They've given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge,
and make an end of suffering in this very
life.[198](endnotes.xhtml_note-198){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-198
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they've done this, they're defined as
a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has
experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true
teaching."

Saying "Good, sir," those mendicants approved and agreed with what
Sāriputta said. Then they asked another question: "But reverend, might
there be another way to describe a noble disciple who has right view,
whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching,
and has come to the true
teaching?"[199](endnotes.xhtml_note-199){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-199
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands fuel, its origin,
its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[200](endnotes.xhtml_note-200){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-200
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they've done this, they're defined as
a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has
experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true
teaching.

But what is fuel? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation? There are these four fuels. They maintain
sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be
born.[201](endnotes.xhtml_note-201){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-201
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? Solid food, whether solid or
subtle; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and
consciousness the
fourth.[202](endnotes.xhtml_note-202){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-202
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Fuel originates from craving. Fuel ceases
when craving ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of fuel is
simply this noble eightfold path, that
is:[203](endnotes.xhtml_note-203){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-203
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion.

A noble disciple understands in this way fuel, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They've
completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, got rid of the
underlying tendency to repulsion, and eradicated the underlying tendency
to the view and conceit 'I am'. They've given up ignorance and given
rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. When
they've done this, they're defined as a noble disciple who has right
view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the
teaching, and has come to the true teaching."

Saying "Good, sir," those mendicants ... asked another question: "But
reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who
... has come to the true teaching?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands suffering, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[204](endnotes.xhtml_note-204){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-204
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they've done this, they're defined as
a noble disciple who ... has come to the true teaching. But what is
suffering? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that
leads to its cessation? Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering;
death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are
suffering; association with the disliked is suffering; separation from
the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In
brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering.[205](endnotes.xhtml_note-205){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-205
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called suffering. And what is the
origin of suffering? It's the craving that leads to future lives, mixed
up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it lands. That
is,[206](endnotes.xhtml_note-206){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-206
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} craving for sensual pleasures, craving for
continued existence, and craving to end
existence.[207](endnotes.xhtml_note-207){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-207
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the origin of suffering. And
what is the cessation of suffering? It's the fading away and cessation
of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away,
letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to
it.[208](endnotes.xhtml_note-208){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-208
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the cessation of suffering.
And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? It is
simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view ... right
immersion. This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.

A noble disciple understands in this way suffering, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They've
completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, got rid of the
underlying tendency to repulsion, and eradicated the underlying tendency
to the view and conceit 'I am'. They've given up ignorance and given
rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. When
they've done this, they're defined as a noble disciple who has right
view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the
teaching, and has come to the true teaching."

Saying "Good, sir," those mendicants ... asked another question: "But
reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who
... has come to the true teaching?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands old age and death,
their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their
cessation
...[209](endnotes.xhtml_note-209){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-209
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what are old age and death? What is
their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their
cessation? The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, gray hair, wrinkly
skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient
beings in the various orders of sentient
beings.[210](endnotes.xhtml_note-210){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-210
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called old age. And what is
death?[211](endnotes.xhtml_note-211){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-211
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The passing away, perishing,
disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the
aggregates, laying to rest of the corpse, and cutting off of the life
faculty of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient
beings. This is called death. Such is old age, and such is death. This
is called old age and death. Old age and death originate from rebirth.
Old age and death cease when rebirth ceases. The practice that leads to
the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path
..."[212](endnotes.xhtml_note-212){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-212
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands rebirth, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation ...
But what is rebirth? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation? The rebirth, inception, conception,
reincarnation, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the
sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of
sentient beings. This is called rebirth. Rebirth originates from
continued existence. Rebirth ceases when continued existence ceases. The
practice that leads to the cessation of rebirth is simply this noble
eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands continued
existence, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[213](endnotes.xhtml_note-213){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-213
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is continued existence? What is
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation?
There are these three states of continued
existence.[214](endnotes.xhtml_note-214){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-214
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Existence in the sensual realm, the realm
of luminous form, and the formless
realm.[215](endnotes.xhtml_note-215){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-215
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Continued existence originates from
grasping. Continued existence ceases when grasping ceases. The practice
that leads to the cessation of continued existence is simply this noble
eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands grasping, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation
...[216](endnotes.xhtml_note-216){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-216
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is grasping? What is its origin,
its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? There are
these four kinds of grasping. Grasping at sensual pleasures, views,
precepts and observances, and theories of a
self.[217](endnotes.xhtml_note-217){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-217
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Grasping originates from craving. Grasping
ceases when craving ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
grasping is simply this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands craving, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation ...
But what is craving? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation? There are these six classes of craving.
Craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and
ideas.[218](endnotes.xhtml_note-218){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-218
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Craving originates from feeling. Craving
ceases when feeling ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
craving is simply this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands feeling, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation
...[219](endnotes.xhtml_note-219){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-219
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is feeling? What is its origin,
its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? There are
these six classes of feeling. Feeling born of contact through the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Feeling originates from contact.
Feeling ceases when contact ceases. The practice that leads to the
cessation of feeling is simply this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands contact, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation
...[220](endnotes.xhtml_note-220){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-220
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is contact? What is its origin,
its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? There are
these six classes of contact. Contact through the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and
mind.[221](endnotes.xhtml_note-221){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-221
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Contact originates from the six sense
fields. Contact ceases when the six sense fields cease. The practice
that leads to the cessation of contact is simply this noble eightfold
path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands the six sense
fields, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to
their cessation
...[222](endnotes.xhtml_note-222){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-222
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what are the six sense fields? What is
their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their
cessation? There are these six sense fields. The sense fields of the
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind.[223](endnotes.xhtml_note-223){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-223
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The six sense fields originate from name
and form. The six sense fields cease when name and form cease. The
practice that leads to the cessation of the six sense fields is simply
this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands name and form,
their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their
cessation
...[224](endnotes.xhtml_note-224){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-224
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what are name and form? What is their
origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation?
Feeling, perception, intention, contact, and application of
mind---[225](endnotes.xhtml_note-225){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-225
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this is called name. The four primary
elements, and form derived from the four primary
elements---[226](endnotes.xhtml_note-226){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-226
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this is called form. Such is name and such
is form. This is called name and form. Name and form originate from
consciousness. Name and form cease when consciousness ceases. The
practice that leads to the cessation of name and form is simply this
noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands consciousness, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation
...[227](endnotes.xhtml_note-227){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-227
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is consciousness? What is its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation?
There are these six classes of consciousness. Eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, and mind
consciousness.[228](endnotes.xhtml_note-228){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-228
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Consciousness originates from choices.
Consciousness ceases when choices cease. The practice that leads to the
cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands choices, their
origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation
...[229](endnotes.xhtml_note-229){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-229
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what are choices? What is their origin,
their cessation, and the practice that leads to their
cessation?[230](endnotes.xhtml_note-230){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-230
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are these three kinds of choice.
Choices by way of body, speech, and
mind.[231](endnotes.xhtml_note-231){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-231
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Choices originate from ignorance. Choices
cease when ignorance ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
choices is simply this noble eightfold path ..."

"Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands ignorance, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation
...[232](endnotes.xhtml_note-232){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-232
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But what is ignorance? What is its origin,
its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? Not knowing
about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering,
and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. This is
called ignorance. Ignorance originates from defilement. Ignorance ceases
when defilement ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
ignorance is simply this noble eightfold path
..."[233](endnotes.xhtml_note-233){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-233
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Saying "Good, sir," those mendicants approved and agreed with what
Sāriputta said. Then they asked another question: "But reverend, might
there be another way to describe a noble disciple who has right view,
whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching,
and has come to the true teaching?"

"There might, reverends. A noble disciple understands defilement, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[234](endnotes.xhtml_note-234){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-234
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they've done this, they're defined as
a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has
experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true
teaching.

But what is defilement? What is its origin, its cessation, and the
practice that leads to its cessation? There are these three defilements.
The defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.
Defilement originates from ignorance. Defilement ceases when ignorance
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of defilement is simply
this noble eightfold path, that
is:[235](endnotes.xhtml_note-235){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-235
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion.

A noble disciple understands in this way defilement, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They've
completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, got rid of the
underlying tendency to repulsion, and eradicated the underlying tendency
to the view and conceit 'I am'. They've given up ignorance and given
rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. When
they've done this, they're defined as a noble disciple who has right
view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the
teaching, and has come to the true teaching."

This is what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the mendicants
approved what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="mn10">

### [MN 10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[236](endnotes.xhtml_note-236){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-236
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to
convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past
sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the
system, and to realize
extinguishment.[237](endnotes.xhtml_note-237){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-237
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the
world.[238](endnotes.xhtml_note-238){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-238
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the
world.[239](endnotes.xhtml_note-239){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-239
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the
world.[240](endnotes.xhtml_note-240){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-240
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the
world.[241](endnotes.xhtml_note-241){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-241
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

#### 1. Observing the Body {.subheading}

##### 1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their
presence.[242](endnotes.xhtml_note-242){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-242
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful,
they breathe
out.[243](endnotes.xhtml_note-243){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-243
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out
heavily.'[244](endnotes.xhtml_note-244){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-244
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.'
Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out
lightly.'[245](endnotes.xhtml_note-245){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-245
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole
body.'[246](endnotes.xhtml_note-246){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-246
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical
process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the
physical
process.'[247](endnotes.xhtml_note-247){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-247
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like a deft carpenter or carpenter's apprentice. When making a deep
cut they know: 'I'm making a deep cut,' and when making a shallow cut
they know: 'I'm making a shallow
cut.'[248](endnotes.xhtml_note-248){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-248
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and
externally.[249](endnotes.xhtml_note-249){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-249
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They meditate observing the body as liable
to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to both originate and
vanish.[250](endnotes.xhtml_note-250){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-250
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the
world.[251](endnotes.xhtml_note-251){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-251
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

##### 1.2. The Postures {.subheading}

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: 'I am walking.' When
standing they know: 'I am standing.' When sitting they know: 'I am
sitting.' And when lying down they know: 'I am lying
down.'[252](endnotes.xhtml_note-252){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-252
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whatever posture their body is in, they
know it.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

##### 1.3. Situational Awareness {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out
and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and
extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when
eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating;
when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[253](endnotes.xhtml_note-253){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-253
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

##### 1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of
filth.[254](endnotes.xhtml_note-254){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-254
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid,
urine.'[255](endnotes.xhtml_note-255){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-255
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with
various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas,
sesame, and ordinary rice. And someone with clear eyes were to open it
and examine the contents: 'These grains are fine rice, these are wheat,
these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are
ordinary
rice.'[256](endnotes.xhtml_note-256){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-256
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

##### 1.5. Focusing on the Elements {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement
or posture, according to the elements: 'In this body there is the earth
element, the water element, the fire element, and the air
element.'[257](endnotes.xhtml_note-257){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-257
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's as if a deft butcher or butcher's apprentice were to kill a cow and
sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into
chops.[258](endnotes.xhtml_note-258){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-258
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

##### 1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations {.subheading}

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and
festering.[259](endnotes.xhtml_note-259){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-259
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd compare it with their own
body:[260](endnotes.xhtml_note-260){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-260
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This body is also of that same nature,
that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate
observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers,
leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. They'd compare it
with their own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same
kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an
aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ...

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a
thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here
an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the
skull. ...

White bones, the color of shells ...

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...

Bones rotted and crumbled to
powder.[261](endnotes.xhtml_note-261){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-261
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd compare it with their own body:
'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go
beyond that.'

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 2. Observing the Feelings {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of
feelings?[262](endnotes.xhtml_note-262){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-262
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: 'I feel a
pleasant
feeling.'[263](endnotes.xhtml_note-263){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-263
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: 'I feel a painful feeling.'

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: 'I feel a neutral feeling.'

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling of the
flesh.'[264](endnotes.xhtml_note-264){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-264
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling not of the
flesh.'[265](endnotes.xhtml_note-265){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-265
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling not of the
flesh.'[266](endnotes.xhtml_note-266){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-266
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling not of the
flesh.'[267](endnotes.xhtml_note-267){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-267
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
feelings as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that feelings
exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

#### 3. Observing the Mind {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the
mind?[268](endnotes.xhtml_note-268){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-268
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's when a mendicant understands mind with greed as 'mind with greed,'
and mind without greed as 'mind without greed.' They understand mind
with hate as 'mind with hate,' and mind without hate as 'mind without
hate.' They understand mind with delusion as 'mind with delusion,' and
mind without delusion as 'mind without delusion.' They know constricted
mind as 'constricted
mind,'[269](endnotes.xhtml_note-269){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-269
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and scattered mind as 'scattered mind.'
They know expansive mind as 'expansive
mind,'[270](endnotes.xhtml_note-270){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-270
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and unexpansive mind as 'unexpansive mind.'
They know mind that is not supreme as 'mind that is not supreme,' and
mind that is supreme as 'mind that is supreme.' They know mind immersed
in samādhi as 'mind immersed in samādhi,' and mind not immersed in
samādhi as 'mind not immersed in samādhi.' They know freed mind as
'freed mind,' and unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind.'

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the mind as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the mind
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

#### 4. Observing Principles {.subheading}

##### 4.1. The Hindrances {.subheading}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five
hindrances.[271](endnotes.xhtml_note-271){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-271
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant meditate observing
an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: 'I
have sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them,
they understand: 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand
how sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up;
and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the
future.[272](endnotes.xhtml_note-272){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-272
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have ill will in them, they understand: 'I have ill will in
me.' When they don't have ill will in them, they understand: 'I don't
have ill will in me.' They understand how ill will arises; how, when
it's already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it
doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me.' When they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I don't have dullness and
drowsiness in me.' They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise;
how, when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once
they're given up, they don't arise again in the
future.[273](endnotes.xhtml_note-273){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-273
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: 'I
have restlessness and remorse in me.' When they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them, they understand: 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me.' They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them, they understand: 'I have doubt in me.'
When they don't have doubt in them, they understand: 'I don't have doubt
in me.' They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.

##### 4.2. The Aggregates {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates. And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
grasping aggregates? It's when a mendicant contemplates: 'Such is form,
such is the origin of form, such is the ending of
form.[274](endnotes.xhtml_note-274){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-274
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is feeling, such is the origin of
feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the
origin of perception, such is the ending of
perception.[275](endnotes.xhtml_note-275){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-275
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such are choices, such is the origin of
choices, such is the ending of
choices.[276](endnotes.xhtml_note-276){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-276
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is consciousness, such is the origin
of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.'

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

##### 4.3. The Sense Fields {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields. And how does
a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to
the six interior and exterior sense fields?

It's when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that
arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that
has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be
abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the
future.[277](endnotes.xhtml_note-277){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-277
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter ...

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter ...

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter ...

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter ...

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on
both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes
to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the
abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six internal and external sense fields.

##### 4.4. The Awakening Factors {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening
factors.[278](endnotes.xhtml_note-278){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-278
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does a mendicant meditate observing
an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors?

It's when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in
them understands: 'I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
When they don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they
understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not
arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that
has arisen becomes fulfilled by
development.[279](endnotes.xhtml_note-279){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-279
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles
...[280](endnotes.xhtml_note-280){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-280
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} energy ... rapture ... tranquility ...
immersion ... equanimity in them, they understand: 'I have the awakening
factor of equanimity in me.' When they don't have the awakening factor
of equanimity in them, they understand: 'I don't have the awakening
factor of equanimity in me.' They understand how the awakening factor of
equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening
factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.

##### 4.5. The Truths {.subheading}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble
truths.[281](endnotes.xhtml_note-281){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-281
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with
respect to the four noble truths? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of
suffering.'[282](endnotes.xhtml_note-282){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-282
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this
way for seven years can expect one of two
results:[283](endnotes.xhtml_note-283){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-283
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} enlightenment in the present life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

Let alone seven
years,[284](endnotes.xhtml_note-284){#mn-mulapannasa.xhtml_noteref-284
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} anyone who develops these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation in this way for six years ... five years ... four
years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven months ...
six months ... five months ... four months ... three months ... two
months ... one month ... a fortnight ... Let alone a fortnight, anyone
who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for
seven days can expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present
life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

'The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on the Lion's Roar {#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_mn-sihanadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn11">

### [MN 11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Lion's Roar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷasīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[285](endnotes.xhtml_note-285){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-285
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"'Only here is there a true ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third
ascetic, and here a fourth
ascetic.[286](endnotes.xhtml_note-286){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-286
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Other sects are empty of ascetics.' This,
mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion's roar.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'But what is
the source of the venerables' certainty and forcefulness that they say
this?'[287](endnotes.xhtml_note-287){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-287
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should say to them: 'There are four
things explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. Seeing these things in ourselves we say
that:[288](endnotes.xhtml_note-288){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-288
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Only here is there a true ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third
ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects are empty of ascetics."
What four? We have confidence in the Teacher, we have confidence in the
teaching, and we have fulfilled the precepts. And we have love and
affection for those who share our
path,[289](endnotes.xhtml_note-289){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-289
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} both laypeople and renunciates. These are
the four things.'

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'We too have
confidence in the Teacher---our Teacher; we have confidence in the
teaching---our teaching; and we have fulfilled the precepts---our
precepts. And we have love and affection for those who share our path,
both laypeople and renunciates. What, then, is the difference between
you and us?'

You should say to them: 'Well, reverends, is the goal one or many?'
Answering rightly, the wanderers would say: 'The goal is one, reverends,
not many.'

'But is that goal for the greedy or for those free of greed?' Answering
rightly, the wanderers would say: 'That goal is for those free of greed,
not for the greedy.'

'Is it for the hateful or those free of hate?' 'It's for those free of
hate.'

'Is it for the delusional or those free of delusion?' 'It's for those
free of delusion.'

'Is it for those who crave or those rid of craving?' 'It's for those rid
of craving.'

'Is it for those who have fuel for grasping or those who do not?' 'It's
for those who do not have fuel for grasping.'

'Is it for the knowledgeable or the ignorant?' 'It's for the
knowledgeable.'

'Is it for those who favor and oppose or for those who don't favor and
oppose?' 'It's for those who don't favor and oppose.'

'But is that goal for those who enjoy proliferation or for those who
enjoy
non-proliferation?'[290](endnotes.xhtml_note-290){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-290
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Answering rightly, the wanderers would say:
'It's for those who enjoy non-proliferation, not for those who enjoy
proliferation.'

Mendicants, there are these two views: views favoring continued
existence and views favoring ending
existence.[291](endnotes.xhtml_note-291){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-291
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Any ascetics or brahmins who resort to,
draw near to, and cling to a view favoring continued existence will
oppose a view favoring ending
existence.[292](endnotes.xhtml_note-292){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-292
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Any ascetics or brahmins who resort to,
draw near to, and cling to a view favoring ending existence will oppose
a view favoring continued existence.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand these
two views' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. They're
greedy, hateful, delusional, craving, grasping, and ignorant. They favor
and oppose, and they enjoy proliferation. They're not freed from
rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. They're not freed from suffering, I say.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand these two
views' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. They're rid
of greed, hate, delusion, craving, grasping, and ignorance. They don't
favor and oppose, and they enjoy non-proliferation. They're freed from
rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. They're freed from suffering, I say.

There are these four kinds of grasping. What four? Grasping at sensual
pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the complete
understanding of all kinds of grasping. But they don't correctly
describe the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping. They
describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures,
but not views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self.[293](endnotes.xhtml_note-293){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-293
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because those gentlemen don't
truly understand these three things. That's why they claim to propound
the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping, but they don't
really.

There are some other ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the
complete understanding of all kinds of grasping, but they don't really.
They describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual
pleasures and views, but not precepts and observances, and theories of a
self.[294](endnotes.xhtml_note-294){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-294
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because those gentlemen don't
truly understand these two things. That's why they claim to propound the
complete understanding of all kinds of grasping, but they don't really.

There are some other ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the
complete understanding of all kinds of grasping, but they don't really.
They describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual
pleasures, views, and precepts and observances, but not theories of a
self.[295](endnotes.xhtml_note-295){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-295
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because those gentlemen don't
truly understand this one thing. That's why they claim to propound the
complete understanding of all kinds of grasping, but they don't really.

In such a teaching and training, confidence in the Teacher is said to be
not rightly
placed.[296](endnotes.xhtml_note-296){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-296
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Likewise, confidence in the teaching,
fulfillment of the precepts, and love and affection for those sharing
the same path are said to be not rightly placed. Why is that? It's
because that teaching and training is poorly explained and poorly
propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.

The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha claims to
propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping. He
describes the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures,
views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

In such a teaching and training, confidence in the Teacher is said to be
rightly placed. Likewise, confidence in the teaching, fulfillment of the
precepts, and love and affection for those sharing the same path are
said to be rightly placed. Why is that? It's because that teaching and
training is well explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to
peace, proclaimed by a fully awakened Buddha.

What is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of these four
kinds of
grasping?[297](endnotes.xhtml_note-297){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-297
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Craving. And what is the source, origin,
birthplace, and inception of craving? Feeling. And what is the source of
feeling? Contact. And what is the source of contact? The six sense
fields. And what is the source of the six sense fields? Name and form.
And what is the source of name and form? Consciousness. And what is the
source of consciousness? Choices. And what is the source of choices?
Ignorance.

When that mendicant has given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge,
they don't grasp at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances,
or theories of a self. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being
anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn12">

### [MN 12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Lion's Roar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying outside the
city of Vesālī in a woodland grove west of the
town.[298](endnotes.xhtml_note-298){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-298
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Sunakkhatta the Licchavi had recently left this
teaching and
training.[299](endnotes.xhtml_note-299){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-299
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He was telling a crowd in Vesālī:

"The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble
ones.[300](endnotes.xhtml_note-300){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-300
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He teaches what he's worked out by logic,
following a line of inquiry, expressing his own
perspective.[301](endnotes.xhtml_note-301){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-301
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And his teaching leads those who practice
it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it's
taught."[302](endnotes.xhtml_note-302){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-302
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. He heard what Sunakkhatta was saying.

Then he wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from
almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told
him what had happened.

"Sāriputta, Sunakkhatta, that futile man, is
angry.[303](endnotes.xhtml_note-303){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-303
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} His words are spoken out of anger. Thinking
he criticizes the Realized One, in fact he just praises him. For it is
praise of the Realized One to say: 'His teaching leads those who
practice it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it's
taught.'

But there's no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the
teaching:[304](endnotes.xhtml_note-304){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-304
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.'

And there's no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:
'That Blessed One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
himself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful; controlling the body as far as the Brahmā
realm.'[305](endnotes.xhtml_note-305){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-305
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And there's no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:
'That Blessed One, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
hears both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'

And there's no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:
'That Blessed One understands the minds of other beings and individuals,
having comprehended them with his own mind. He understands mind with
greed as "mind with greed," and mind without greed as "mind without
greed." He understands mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind
with delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ...
scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is
supreme ... mind that is not supreme ... mind immersed in samādhi ...
mind not immersed in samādhi ... freed mind as "freed mind," and unfreed
mind as "unfreed mind."'

There are these ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One
possesses. With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and turns the divine
wheel.[306](endnotes.xhtml_note-306){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-306
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What ten?

Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible,
and the impossible as
impossible.[307](endnotes.xhtml_note-307){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-307
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull's place,
roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes.[308](endnotes.xhtml_note-308){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-308
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of
practice
lead.[309](endnotes.xhtml_note-309){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-309
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many
and diverse
elements.[310](endnotes.xhtml_note-310){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-310
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions
of sentient
beings.[311](endnotes.xhtml_note-311){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-311
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his
mind.[312](endnotes.xhtml_note-312){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-312
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments.[313](endnotes.xhtml_note-313){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-313
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so he
recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.[314](endnotes.xhtml_note-314){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-314
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and
they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of
body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had
right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their
body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he
sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He
understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly
understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this
he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel.

A Realized One possesses these ten powers of a Realized One. With these
he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel.

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: 'The
ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones. He teaches what he's worked out by logic,
following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.' Unless
they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they
will be cast down to
hell.[315](endnotes.xhtml_note-315){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-315
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics,
immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such
is the consequence, I say. Unless they give up that speech and that
thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down to hell.

Sāriputta, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these
he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine
wheel.[316](endnotes.xhtml_note-316){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-316
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four?

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don't understand these
things.'[317](endnotes.xhtml_note-317){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-317
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since I see no such reason, I live secure,
fearless, and assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these
defilements.' Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and
assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for
the one who performs
them.'[318](endnotes.xhtml_note-318){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-318
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since I see no such reason, I live secure,
fearless, and assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'The teaching doesn't lead those who practice it to the complete ending
of suffering, the goal for which it is taught.' Since I see no such
reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured.

A Realized One has these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel.

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: 'The
ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones ...' Unless they give up that speech and that
thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down to hell.

Sāriputta, there are these eight
assemblies.[319](endnotes.xhtml_note-319){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-319
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight? The assemblies of aristocrats,
brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the
four great kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An
assembly of Māras. An assembly of Brahmās. These are the eight
assemblies. Possessing these four kinds of self-assurance, the Realized
One approaches and enters right into these eight
assemblies.[320](endnotes.xhtml_note-320){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-320
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I recall having approached an assembly of
hundreds of
aristocrats.[321](endnotes.xhtml_note-321){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-321
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There I used to sit with them, converse,
and engage in discussion. But I don't see any reason to feel afraid or
insecure. Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and
assured.

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins ...
householders ... ascetics ... the gods of the four great kings ... the
gods of the thirty-three ... Māras ... Brahmās. There too I used to sit
with them, converse, and engage in discussion. But I don't see any
reason to feel afraid or insecure. Since I see no such reason, I live
secure, fearless, and assured.

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: 'The
ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones ...' Unless they give up that speech and that
thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down to hell.

Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of
reproduction.[322](endnotes.xhtml_note-322){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-322
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? Reproduction for creatures born
from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or
spontaneously.[323](endnotes.xhtml_note-323){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-323
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is reproduction from an egg? There are beings who are born by
breaking out of an eggshell. This is called reproduction from an egg.
And what is reproduction from a womb? There are beings who are born by
breaking out of the amniotic sac. This is called reproduction from a
womb. And what is reproduction from moisture? There are beings who are
born in a rotten fish, in a rotten carcass, in rotten dough, in a
cesspool or a sump. This is called reproduction from moisture. And what
is spontaneous reproduction? Gods, hell-beings, certain humans, and
certain beings in the lower realms. This is called spontaneous
reproduction. These are the four kinds of reproduction.

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: 'The
ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones ...' Unless they give up that speech and that
thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down to hell.

There are these five destinations. What five? Hell, the animal realm,
the ghost realm, humanity, and the
gods.[324](endnotes.xhtml_note-324){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-324
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I understand hell, and the path and practice that leads to hell. And I
understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. I understand the animal realm ... the ghost realm ... humanity ...
gods, and the path and practice that leads to the world of the gods. And
I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. And I
understand extinguishment, and the path and practice that leads to
extinguishment. And I understand how someone practicing that way
realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and lives having realized it with their own insight due to
the ending of defilements.

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I
understand:[325](endnotes.xhtml_note-325){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-325
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This person is practicing in such a way
and has entered such a path that when their body breaks up, after death,
they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.' Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in hell,
where they experience exclusively painful feelings, sharp and severe.
Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man's height,
full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor
smoked.[326](endnotes.xhtml_note-326){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-326
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then along comes a person struggling in the
oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a
path that meets with that same pit of coals. If a person with clear eyes
saw them, they'd say: 'This person is proceeding in such a way and has
entered such a path that they will arrive at that very pit of coals.'
Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that pit of
coals, where they experience exclusively painful feelings, sharp and
severe. ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: 'This
person ... will be reborn in the animal realm.' Some time later I see
that they have indeed been reborn in the animal realm, where they suffer
painful feelings, sharp and
severe.[327](endnotes.xhtml_note-327){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-327
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a
man's height, full to the brim with feces. Then along comes a person
struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they
have set out on a path that meets with that same sewer. If a person with
clear eyes saw them, they'd say: 'This person is proceeding in such a
way and has entered such a path that they will arrive at that very
sewer.' Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that
sewer, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: 'This
person ... will be reborn in the ghost realm.' Some time later I see
that they have indeed been reborn in the ghost realm, where they
experience mostly painful
feelings.[328](endnotes.xhtml_note-328){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-328
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a tree growing on rugged
ground, with thin foliage casting dappled
shade.[329](endnotes.xhtml_note-329){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-329
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then along comes a person struggling in the
oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a
path that meets with that same tree. If a person with clear eyes saw
them, they'd say: 'This person is proceeding in such a way and has
entered such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.' Some time
later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they
experience mostly painful feelings. ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: 'This
person ... will be reborn among human beings.' Some time later I see
that they have indeed been reborn among human beings, where they
experience mostly pleasant feelings. Suppose there was a tree growing on
smooth ground, with abundant foliage casting dense shade. Then along
comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and
parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree.
If a person with clear eyes saw them, they'd say: 'This person is
proceeding in such a way and has entered such a path that they will
arrive at that very tree.' Some time later they see them sitting or
lying under that tree, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings.
...

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: 'This
person ... will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' Some time
later I see that they have indeed been reborn in a heavenly realm, where
they experience exclusively pleasant feelings. Suppose there was a stilt
longhouse with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with
door fastened and window shuttered. And it had a couch spread with
woolen covers---shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with
flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
pillows at both ends. Then along comes a person struggling in the
oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a
path that meets with that same stilt longhouse. If a person with clear
eyes saw them, they'd say: 'This person is proceeding in such a way and
has entered such a path that they will arrive at that very stilt
longhouse.' Some time later they see them sitting or lying in that stilt
longhouse, where they experience exclusively pleasant feelings. ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: 'This
person is practicing in such a way and has entered such a path that they
will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.' Some time later I see that they have
indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements, experiencing exclusively pleasant
feelings. Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water,
clean, with smooth banks, delightful. Nearby was a dense forest
grove.[330](endnotes.xhtml_note-330){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-330
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then along comes a person struggling in the
oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a
path that meets with that same lotus pond. If a person with clear eyes
saw them, they'd say: 'This person is proceeding in such a way and has
entered such a path that they will arrive at that very lotus pond.' Some
time later they would see that person after they had plunged into that
lotus pond, bathed and drunk. When all their stress, weariness, and heat
exhaustion had faded away, they emerged and sat or lay down in that
woodland thicket, where they experienced exclusively pleasant feelings.

In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand: 'This person is practicing in such a way and has entered
such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements.' Some time later I
see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements, experiencing
exclusively pleasant feelings. These are the five destinations.

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: 'The
ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones. He teaches what he's worked out by logic,
following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.' Unless
they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they
will be cast down to hell. Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics,
immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such
is the consequence, I say. Unless they give up that speech and that
thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down to hell.

Sāriputta, I recall having practiced a spiritual path consisting of four
factors.[331](endnotes.xhtml_note-331){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-331
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I used to be a fervent mortifier, the
ultimate fervent mortifier. I used to live rough, the ultimate
rough-liver. I used to live in disgust of sin, the ultimate one living
in disgust of sin. I used to be secluded, in ultimate
seclusion.[332](endnotes.xhtml_note-332){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-332
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And this is what my fervent mortification was like. I went naked,
ignoring conventions. I licked my hands, and didn't come or stop when
asked. I didn't consent to food brought to me, or food prepared
specially for me, or an invitation for a
meal.[333](endnotes.xhtml_note-333){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-333
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I didn't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where
food for distribution is advertised; or where there's a dog waiting or
flies buzzing. I accepted no fish or meat or liquor or wine, and drank
no
beer.[334](endnotes.xhtml_note-334){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-334
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I went to just one house for alms, taking
just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses
and seven mouthfuls. I fed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to
seven saucers a day. I ate once a day, once every second day, up to once
a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. I lived committed to the
practice of eating food at set intervals.

I ate herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. I survived on
forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen
fruit.[335](endnotes.xhtml_note-335){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-335
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I wore robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls'
wings.[336](endnotes.xhtml_note-336){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-336
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I tore out hair and beard, committed to
this
practice.[337](endnotes.xhtml_note-337){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-337
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I constantly stood, refusing
seats.[338](endnotes.xhtml_note-338){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-338
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I squatted, committed to the endeavor of
squatting. I lay on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns my bed. I
was devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening.[339](endnotes.xhtml_note-339){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-339
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so I lived committed to practicing
these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. Such was my
practice of fervent mortification.

And this is what my rough living was
like.[340](endnotes.xhtml_note-340){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-340
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The dust and dirt built up on my body over
many years until it started flaking off. It's like the trunk of a
pale-moon ebony tree, which builds up bark over many years until it
starts flaking off. But it didn't occur to me: 'Oh, this dust and dirt
must be rubbed off by my hand or another's.' That didn't occur to me.
Such was my rough living.

And this is what my living in disgust of sin was like. I'd step forward
or back ever so mindfully, so I was full of pity regarding even a drop
of water,
thinking:[341](endnotes.xhtml_note-341){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-341
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'May I not injure any little creatures on
unclear
ground.'[342](endnotes.xhtml_note-342){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-342
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such was my living in disgust of sin.

And this is what my seclusion was
like.[343](endnotes.xhtml_note-343){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-343
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I would plunge deep into a wilderness
region and stay there. When I saw a cowherd or a shepherd, or someone
gathering grass or sticks, or a lumberjack, I'd flee from forest to
forest, from thicket to thicket, from valley to valley, from uplands to
uplands. Why is that? So that I wouldn't see them, nor they me. I fled
like a wild deer seeing a human being. Such was my practice of
seclusion.[344](endnotes.xhtml_note-344){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-344
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I would go on all fours into the cow-pens after the cattle had left and
eat the dung of the young suckling calves. As long as my own urine and
excrement lasted, I would even eat that. Such was my eating of most
unnatural
things.[345](endnotes.xhtml_note-345){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-345
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I would plunge deep into an awe-inspiring forest grove and stay there.
It was so awe-inspiring that normally it would make your hair stand on
end if you weren't free of greed. And on days such as the cold spell
when the snow falls in the January winter, I stayed in the open by night
and in the forest by
day.[346](endnotes.xhtml_note-346){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-346
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But in the last month of summer I'd stay in
the open by day and in the forest by night. And then these verses, which
were neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past,
occurred to
me:[347](endnotes.xhtml_note-347){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-347
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'Scorched and frozen,\
> alone in the awe-inspiring forest.\
> Naked, no fire to sit beside,\
> the sage still pursues his quest.'

I would make my bed in a charnel ground, with the bones of the dead for
a pillow. Then village louts would come up to me. They'd spit and piss
on me, throw mud on me, even poke sticks in my
ears.[348](endnotes.xhtml_note-348){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-348
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I don't recall ever having a bad
thought about them. Such was my abiding in equanimity.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from
food.'[349](endnotes.xhtml_note-349){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-349
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They say: 'Let's live on jujubes.' So they
eat jujubes and jujube powder, and drink jujube juice. And they enjoy
many jujube concoctions. I recall eating just a single jujube. You might
think that at that time the jujubes must have been very big. But you
should not see it like this. The jujubes then were at most the same size
as today. Eating so very little, my body became extremely emaciated. Due
to eating so little, my major and minor limbs became like the joints of
an eighty-year-old or a dying
man,[350](endnotes.xhtml_note-350){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-350
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} my bottom became like a camel's hoof, my
vertebrae stuck out like beads on a string, and my ribs were as gaunt as
the broken-down rafters on an old barn. Due to eating so little, the
gleam of my eyes sank deep in their sockets, like the gleam of water
sunk deep down a well. Due to eating so little, my scalp shriveled and
withered like a green bitter-gourd in the wind and sun. Due to eating so
little, the skin of my belly stuck to my backbone, so that when I tried
to rub the skin of my belly I grabbed my backbone, and when I tried to
rub my backbone I rubbed the skin of my belly. Due to eating so little,
when I tried to urinate or defecate I fell face down right there. Due to
eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by rubbing my limbs
with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from food.' They say: 'Let's live on mung beans.' ...
'Let's live on sesame.' ... 'Let's live on ordinary rice.' ... Due to
eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by rubbing my limbs
with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

But Sāriputta, I did not achieve any superhuman distinction in knowledge
and vision worthy of the noble ones by that conduct, that practice, that
grueling work. Why is that? Because I didn't achieve that noble wisdom
that's noble and emancipating, and which delivers one who practices it
to the complete ending of suffering.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from
transmigration.'[351](endnotes.xhtml_note-351){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-351
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's not easy to find a realm that I
haven't previously transmigrated to in all this long time, except for
the gods of the pure abodes. For if I had transmigrated to the gods of
the pure abodes I would not have returned to this realm
again.[352](endnotes.xhtml_note-352){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-352
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from
rebirth.'[353](endnotes.xhtml_note-353){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-353
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's not easy to find any rebirth that
I haven't previously been reborn in ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from abode of rebirth.' But it's not easy to find an abode
where I haven't previously abided ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from
sacrifice.'[354](endnotes.xhtml_note-354){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-354
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's not easy to find a sacrifice that
I haven't previously offered in all this long time, when I was an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Purity comes from serving the sacred
flame.'[355](endnotes.xhtml_note-355){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-355
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's not easy to find a fire that I
haven't previously served in all this long time, when I was an anointed
aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'So long as this gentleman is youthful, young, with pristine black hair,
blessed with youth, in the prime of life he will be endowed with perfect
lucidity of wisdom. But when he's old, elderly, and senior, advanced in
years, and has reached the final stage of life---eighty, ninety, or a
hundred years old---he will lose his lucidity of wisdom.' But you should
not see it like this. For now I am old, elderly, and senior, I'm
advanced in years, and have reached the final stage of life. I am eighty
years
old.[356](endnotes.xhtml_note-356){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-356
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose I had four disciples with a
lifespan of a hundred years. And they each were perfect in memory,
range, retention, and perfect lucidity of
wisdom.[357](endnotes.xhtml_note-357){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-357
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Imagine how easily a well-trained expert
archer with a strong bow would shoot a light arrow across the shadow of
a palm tree. That's how extraordinary they were in memory, range,
retention, and perfect lucidity of wisdom. They'd bring up questions
about the four kinds of mindfulness meditation again and again, and I
would answer each question. They'd remember the answers and not ask the
same question twice. And they'd pause only to eat and drink, go to the
toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness. But the Realized One would not
run out of Dhamma teachings, words and phrases of the teachings, or
spontaneous answers. And at the end of a hundred years my four disciples
would pass away. Even if you have to carry me around on a stretcher,
there will never be any deterioration in the Realized One's lucidity of
wisdom.

And if there's anyone of whom it may be rightly said that a being not
liable to delusion has arisen in the world for the welfare and happiness
of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans, it's of me that this should be said."

Now at that time Venerable Nāgasamāla was standing behind the Buddha
fanning
him.[358](endnotes.xhtml_note-358){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-358
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! While I was listening to this
exposition of the teaching my hair stood up! What is the name of this
exposition of the teaching?"

"Well then, Nāgasamāla, you may remember this exposition of the teaching
as 'The Hair-raising
Discourse'."[359](endnotes.xhtml_note-359){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-359
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Nāgasamāla approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn13">

### [MN 13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Mass of Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahādukkhakkhandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to them, "It's
too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why don't we visit the
monastery of the wanderers of other religions?" Then they went to the
monastery of the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings
with the wanderers there. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers said to them:

"Reverends, the ascetic Gotama advocates the complete understanding of
sensual pleasures, and so do
we.[360](endnotes.xhtml_note-360){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-360
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The ascetic Gotama advocates the complete
understanding of forms, and so do we. The ascetic Gotama advocates the
complete understanding of feelings, and so do
we.[361](endnotes.xhtml_note-361){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-361
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What, then, is the difference between the
ascetic Gotama's teaching and instruction and
ours?"[362](endnotes.xhtml_note-362){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-362
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Those mendicants neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the
wanderers of other religions. They got up from their seat, thinking, "We
will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha
himself."[363](endnotes.xhtml_note-363){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-363
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.
The Buddha said:

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'But reverends, what's the gratification, the drawback, and the
escape when it comes to sensual
pleasures?[364](endnotes.xhtml_note-364){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-364
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What's the gratification, the drawback, and
the escape when it comes to forms? What's the gratification, the
drawback, and the escape when it comes to feelings?' Questioned like
this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in
addition, would get frustrated. Why is that? Because they're out of
their element. I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods, Māras,
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods
and humans---who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions
except for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it
from them.

And what is the gratification of sensual pleasures? There are these five
kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye, which
are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.
Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by
the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. The pleasure and happiness that arise from these
five kinds of sensual stimulation: this is the gratification of sensual
pleasures.

And what is the drawback of sensual pleasures? It's when a gentleman
earns a living by means such as arithmetic, accounting, calculating,
farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of
the professions. But they must face cold and heat, being hurt by the
touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles, and risking death
from hunger and thirst. This is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent
in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, but fail to
earn any money. If this happens, they sorrow and wail and lament,
beating their breast and falling into confusion, saying: 'Oh, my hard
work is wasted. My efforts are fruitless!' This too is a drawback of
sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering
caused by sensual pleasures.

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, and succeed
in earning money. But they experience pain and sadness when they try to
protect it, thinking: 'How can I prevent my wealth from being taken by
rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept away by flood, or taken by
unloved heirs?' And even though they protect it and ward it, rulers or
bandits take it, or fire consumes it, or flood sweeps it away, or
unloved heirs take it. They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their
breast and falling into confusion: 'What once was mine is gone.' This
too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a
mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures kings fight with kings,
aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and
householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child,
child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother
fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and
friend fights with friend. Once they've started quarreling, arguing, and
disputing, they attack each other with fists, stones, rods, and swords,
resulting in death and deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual
pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by
sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and
shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and plunge into a battle massed on
both sides, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing. There
they are struck with arrows and spears, and their heads are chopped off,
resulting in death and deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual
pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by
sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and
shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and charge wetly plastered
bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords
flashing.[365](endnotes.xhtml_note-365){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-365
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they are struck with arrows and
spears, splashed with dung, crushed by a superior force, and their heads
are chopped
off,[366](endnotes.xhtml_note-366){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-366
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} resulting in death and deadly pain. This
too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a
mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they break into houses,
plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery,
and commit adultery. The rulers would arrest them and subject them to
various punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands
or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot',
the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the
'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope',
the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar',
the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs,
being impaled alive, and being
beheaded.[367](endnotes.xhtml_note-367){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-367
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These result in death and deadly pain. This
too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a
mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures, they conduct themselves
badly by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.[368](endnotes.xhtml_note-368){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-368
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is a drawback of sensual pleasures to
do with lives to come, a mass of suffering caused by sensual
pleasures.[369](endnotes.xhtml_note-369){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-369
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the escape from sensual pleasures? Removing and giving up
desire and greed for sensual pleasures: this is the escape from sensual
pleasures.[370](endnotes.xhtml_note-370){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-370
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand sensual
pleasures' gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they
are. It's impossible for them to completely understand sensual pleasures
themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they
will completely understand sensual pleasures. There are ascetics and
brahmins who do truly understand sensual pleasures' gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It is possible for
them to completely understand sensual pleasures themselves, or to
instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely
understand sensual pleasures.

And what is the gratification of forms? Suppose there was a girl of the
brahmins, aristocrats, or householders in her fifteenth or sixteenth
year, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor too fat,
neither too dark nor too fair. Is she not at the height of her beauty
and prettiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"The pleasure and happiness that arise from this beauty and prettiness
is the gratification of forms.

And what is the drawback of forms? Suppose that some time later you were
to see that same sister---eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old---bent
double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing,
past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin
wrinkled, and limbs blotchy.

What do you think, mendicants? Has not that former beauty vanished and
the drawback become clear?"

"Yes, sir."

"This is the drawback of forms.

Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister sick,
suffering, gravely ill, collapsed in her own urine and feces, being
picked up by some and put down by others.

What do you think, mendicants? Has not that former beauty vanished and
the drawback become clear?"

"Yes, sir."

"This too is the drawback of forms.

Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse
discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or
three days, bloated, livid, and
festering.[371](endnotes.xhtml_note-371){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-371
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, mendicants? Has not that former beauty vanished and
the drawback become clear?"

"Yes, sir."

"This too is the drawback of forms.

Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse
discarded in a charnel ground. And it was being devoured by crows,
hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers, leopards, jackals, and many kinds
of little creatures ...

Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse
discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been reduced to a skeleton
with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ... a skeleton rid of
flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by sinews ... a skeleton
rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews ... bones rid of sinews
scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here
an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a hip-bone,
here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here an arm-bone, there a neck-bone,
here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the skull. ...

Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse
discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been reduced to white bones,
the color of shells ... decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ... bones
rotted and crumbled to powder.

What do you think, mendicants? Has not that former beauty vanished and
the drawback become clear?"

"Yes, sir."

"This too is the drawback of forms.

And what is the escape from forms? Removing and giving up desire and
greed for forms: this is the escape from
forms.[372](endnotes.xhtml_note-372){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-372
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand forms'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It's
impossible for them to completely understand forms themselves, or to
instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely
understand forms. There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly
understand forms' gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for
what they are. It is possible for them to completely understand forms
themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they
will completely understand forms.

And what is the gratification of feelings? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[373](endnotes.xhtml_note-373){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-373
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time a mendicant doesn't intend to
hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both; they feel only feelings that
are not hurtful. Freedom from being hurt is the ultimate gratification
of feelings, I say.

Furthermore, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. At that time a mendicant doesn't
intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both; they feel only
feelings that are not hurtful. Freedom from being hurt is the ultimate
gratification of feelings, I say.

And what is the drawback of feelings? That feelings are impermanent,
suffering, and perishable: this is their
drawback.[374](endnotes.xhtml_note-374){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-374
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the escape from feelings? Removing and giving up desire and
greed for feelings: this is the escape from
feelings.[375](endnotes.xhtml_note-375){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-375
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand feelings'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It's
impossible for them to completely understand feelings themselves, or to
instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely
understand feelings. There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly
understand feelings' gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for
what they are. It is possible for them to completely understand feelings
themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they
will completely understand feelings."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn14">

### [MN 14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷadukkhakkhandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to
him,[376](endnotes.xhtml_note-376){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-376
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "For a long time, sir, I have understood
your teaching like this: 'Greed, hate, and delusion are corruptions of
the mind.' Despite understanding this, sometimes my mind is occupied by
thoughts of greed, hate, and delusion. I wonder what qualities remain in
me that I have such
thoughts?"[377](endnotes.xhtml_note-377){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-377
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mahānāma, there is a quality that remains in you that makes you have
such thoughts. For if you had given up that quality you would not still
be living at home and enjoying sensual pleasures. But because you
haven't given up that quality you are still living at home and enjoying
sensual pleasures.

Sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and
distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. So, Mahānāma,
even though a noble disciple has clearly seen this with right wisdom, as
long as they do not achieve the rapture and bliss that are apart from
sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more
peaceful than
that,[378](endnotes.xhtml_note-378){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-378
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they can return to sensual
pleasures.[379](endnotes.xhtml_note-379){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-379
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when they do achieve that rapture and
bliss, or something more peaceful than that, they do not return to
sensual pleasures.

Before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I too clearly saw with right wisdom that: 'Sensual pleasures
give little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are
all the more full of drawbacks.' But so long as I didn't achieve the
rapture and bliss that are apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful
qualities, or something even more peaceful than that, I didn't announce
that I would not return to sensual pleasures. But when I did achieve
that rapture and bliss, or something more peaceful than that, I
announced that I would not return to sensual
pleasures.[380](endnotes.xhtml_note-380){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-380
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the gratification of sensual pleasures? There are these five
kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye, which
are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.
Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by
the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. The pleasure and happiness that arise from these
five kinds of sensual stimulation: this is the gratification of sensual
pleasures.

And what is the drawback of sensual pleasures? It's when a gentleman
earns a living by means such as arithmetic, accounting, calculating,
farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of
the professions. But they must face cold and heat, being hurt by the
touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles, and risking death
from hunger and thirst. This is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent
in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, but fail to
earn any money. If this happens, they sorrow and wail and lament,
beating their breast and falling into confusion, saying: 'Oh, my hard
work is wasted. My efforts are fruitless!' This too is a drawback of
sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering
caused by sensual pleasures.

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, and succeed
in earning money. But they experience pain and sadness when they try to
protect it, thinking: 'How can I prevent my wealth from being taken by
rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept away by flood, or taken by
unloved heirs?' And even though they protect it and ward it, rulers or
bandits take it, or fire consumes it, or flood sweeps it away, or
unloved heirs take it. They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their
breast and falling into confusion: 'What once was mine is gone.' This
too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a
mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures kings fight with kings,
aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and
householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child,
child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother
fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and
friend fights with friend. Once they've started quarreling, arguing, and
disputing, they attack each other with fists, stones, rods, and swords,
resulting in death and deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual
pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by
sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and
shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and plunge into a battle massed on
both sides, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing. There
they are struck with arrows and spears, and their heads are chopped off,
resulting in death and deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual
pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by
sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and
shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and charge wetly plastered
bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing. There they
are struck with arrows and spears, splashed with dung, crushed by a
superior force, and their heads are chopped off, resulting in death and
deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the
present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they break into houses,
plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery,
and commit adultery. The rulers would arrest them and subject them to
various punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands
or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot',
the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the
'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope',
the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar',
the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs,
being impaled alive, and being beheaded. These result in death and
deadly pain. This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the
present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures, they conduct themselves
badly by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. This is a drawback of sensual pleasures to do with lives to come,
a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

Mahānāma, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's
Peak Mountain. Now at that time several Jain ascetics on the slopes of
Isigili at the Black Rock were constantly standing, refusing seats. And
they felt painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to
overexertion.[381](endnotes.xhtml_note-381){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-381
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then in the late afternoon, I came out of retreat and went to the Black
Rock to visit those Jain ascetics. I said to
them,[382](endnotes.xhtml_note-382){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-382
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverends, why are you constantly
standing, refusing seats, so that you suffer painful, sharp, severe,
acute feelings due to
overexertion?'[383](endnotes.xhtml_note-383){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-383
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When I said this, those Jain ascetics said to me, 'Reverend, the Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to
know and see everything without exception,
thus:[384](endnotes.xhtml_note-384){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-384
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Knowledge and vision are constantly and
continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and
waking."[385](endnotes.xhtml_note-385){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-385
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He says, "O Jain ascetics, you have done bad deeds in a past life. Wear
them away with these severe and grueling
austerities.[386](endnotes.xhtml_note-386){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-386
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when in the present you are restrained
in body, speech, and mind, you're not doing any bad deeds for the
future. So, due to eliminating past deeds by fervent mortification, and
not doing any new deeds, there's nothing to come up in the future. With
no future consequence, deeds end. With the ending of deeds, suffering
ends. With the ending of suffering, feeling ends. And with the ending of
feeling, all suffering will have been worn
away."[387](endnotes.xhtml_note-387){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-387
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We endorse and accept this, and we are
satisfied with it.'

When they said this, I said to them, 'But reverends, do you know for
sure that you existed in the past, and it is not the case that you did
not exist?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know for sure that you did bad deeds in the
past?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know that you did such and such bad deeds?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know that so much suffering has already been worn
away? Or that so much suffering still remains to be worn away? Or that
when so much suffering is worn away all suffering will have been worn
away?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know about giving up unskillful qualities in the
present life and embracing skillful qualities?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'So it seems that you don't know any of these things. That being so,
when those in the world who are violent and bloody-handed and of cruel
livelihood are reborn among humans they go forth as Jain
ascetics.'[388](endnotes.xhtml_note-388){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-388
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Reverend Gotama, pleasure is not gained through pleasure; pleasure is
gained through
pain.[389](endnotes.xhtml_note-389){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-389
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For if pleasure were to be gained through
pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha would gain pleasure, since he
lives in greater pleasure than Venerable
Gotama.'[390](endnotes.xhtml_note-390){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-390
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Clearly the venerables have spoken rashly, without reflection. Rather,
I'm the one who should be asked about who lives in greater pleasure,
King Bimbisāra or Venerable
Gotama?'[391](endnotes.xhtml_note-391){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-391
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Clearly we spoke rashly and without reflection. But let that be. Now we
ask Venerable Gotama: "Who lives in greater pleasure, King Bimbisāra or
Venerable Gotama?"\'

'Well then, reverends, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, reverends? Is King Bimbisāra
capable of experiencing perfect happiness for seven days and nights
without moving his body or speaking?'

'No he is not, reverend.'

'What do you think, reverends? Is King Bimbisāra capable of experiencing
perfect happiness for six days ... five days ... four days ... three
days ... two days ... one day?'

'No he is not, reverend.'

'But I am capable of experiencing perfect happiness for one day and
night without moving my body or speaking. I am capable of experiencing
perfect happiness for two days ... three days ... four days ... five
days ... six days ... seven
days.[392](endnotes.xhtml_note-392){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-392
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you think, reverends? This being
so, who lives in greater pleasure, King Bimbisāra or I?'

'This being so, Venerable Gotama lives in greater pleasure than King
Bimbisāra.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Mahānāma the Sakyan approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn15">

### [MN 15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Measuring Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anumānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was
staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park
at Bhesakaḷā's
Wood.[393](endnotes.xhtml_note-393){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-393
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed
the
mendicants:[394](endnotes.xhtml_note-394){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-394
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:

"Suppose a mendicant
invites[395](endnotes.xhtml_note-395){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-395
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} other mendicants to admonish them. But
they're hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to
admonish. They\'re impatient, and don\'t take instruction respectfully.
So their spiritual companions don't think it's worth advising and
instructing them, and that person doesn't gain their
trust.[396](endnotes.xhtml_note-396){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-396
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what are the qualities that make them hard to admonish? Firstly, a
mendicant has corrupt wishes, having fallen under the sway of corrupt
wishes. This is a quality that makes them difficult to admonish.

Furthermore, a mendicant glorifies themselves and puts others down.
...[397](endnotes.xhtml_note-397){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-397
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They're irritable, overcome by anger ...

They're irritable, and acrimonious due to anger ...

They're irritable, and stubborn due to anger ...

They're irritable, and blurt out words bordering on anger ...

When accused, they object to the accuser ...

When accused, they rebuke the accuser ...

When accused, they retort to the accuser ...

When accused, they dodge the issue, distract the discussion with
irrelevant points, and display annoyance, hate, and bitterness ...

When accused, they are unable to account for the evidence
...[398](endnotes.xhtml_note-398){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-398
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They are offensive and contemptuous ...

They're jealous and stingy ...

They're devious and deceitful ...

They're obstinate and arrogant ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is attached to their own views, holding them
tight, and refusing to let
go.[399](endnotes.xhtml_note-399){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-399
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too is a quality that makes them
difficult to admonish.

These are the qualities that make them hard to admonish.

Suppose a mendicant doesn't invite other mendicants to admonish them.
But they're easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to
admonish. They\'re accepting, and take instruction respectfully. So
their spiritual companions think it's worth advising and instructing
them, and that person gains their trust.

And what are the qualities that make them easy to admonish? Firstly, a
mendicant doesn't have corrupt wishes ...

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't attached to their own views, not holding
them tight, but letting them go easily.

These are the qualities that make them easy to admonish.

In such a case, a mendicant should measure themselves like
this.[400](endnotes.xhtml_note-400){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-400
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This person has corrupt wishes, having
fallen under the sway of corrupt wishes. And I don't like or approve of
this person. And if I were to fall under the sway of corrupt wishes,
others wouldn't like or approve of me.' A mendicant who knows this
should give rise to the thought: 'I will not fall under the sway of
corrupt wishes.' ...

'This person is attached to their own views, holding them tight and
refusing to let go. And I don't like or approve of this person. And if I
were to be attached to my own views, holding them tight and refusing to
let go, others wouldn't like or approve of me.' A mendicant who knows
this should give rise to the thought: 'I will not be attached to my own
views, holding them tight, but will let them go easily.'

In such a case, a mendicant should check themselves like this: 'Do I
have corrupt wishes? Have I fallen under the sway of corrupt wishes?'
Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have fallen
under the sway of corrupt wishes. Then they should make an effort to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities. But suppose that, upon
checking, a mendicant knows that they haven't fallen under the sway of
corrupt wishes. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training
day and night in skillful qualities. ...

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they are attached to
their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go. Then they
should make an effort to give up those bad, unskillful qualities.
Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they're not attached
to their own views, holding them tight, but let them go easily. Then
they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful qualities.

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant sees that they haven't given up
all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should make an effort to
give them all up. But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant sees that
they have given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should
meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful
qualities.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove
it.[401](endnotes.xhtml_note-401){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-401
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if they don't see any dirt or blemish
there, they're happy, thinking: 'How fortunate that I'm clean!'

In the same way, suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant sees that they
haven't given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should
make an effort to give them all up. But suppose that, upon checking, a
mendicant sees that they have given up all these bad, unskillful
qualities. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day
and night in skillful
qualities."[402](endnotes.xhtml_note-402){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-402
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This is what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said. Satisfied, the mendicants
approved what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna
said.[403](endnotes.xhtml_note-403){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-403
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn16">

### [MN 16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard-heartedness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetokhilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has not given up five kinds of
hard-heartedness and severed five shackles of the heart, it's not
possible for them to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and
training.[404](endnotes.xhtml_note-404){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-404
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't given
up?[405](endnotes.xhtml_note-405){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-405
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the
Teacher. They're uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first kind of hard-heartedness
they haven't given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... This is the
second kind of hard-heartedness.

They have doubts about the Saṅgha ... This is the third kind of
hard-heartedness.

They have doubts about the training
...[406](endnotes.xhtml_note-406){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-406
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the fourth kind of
hard-heartedness.

Furthermore, a mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual
companions, resentful and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they haven't given up. These are the
five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed? Firstly, a
mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind doesn't incline
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first shackle of the heart they haven't severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... This is
the second shackle of the heart.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for form ... This is the
third shackle of the heart.

They eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then indulge in
the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and drowsing ... This is the
fourth heart shackle.

They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one of the orders of
gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or
spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being so, their mind
doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the fifth shackle of the heart they haven't severed. These are
the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed.

When a mendicant has not given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness
and severed these five shackles of the heart, it's not possible for them
to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and
training.

When a mendicant has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and
severed these five shackles of the heart, it is possible for them to
achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they've given up? Firstly, a
mendicant has no doubts about the Teacher. They're not uncertain,
undecided, or lacking confidence. This being so, their mind inclines
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first kind of hard-heartedness they've given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has no doubts about the teaching ...

They have no doubts about the Saṅgha ...

They have no doubts about the training ...

They're not angry and upset with their spiritual companions, not
resentful or closed off. This being so, their mind inclines toward
keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the fifth kind
of hard-heartedness they've given up. These are the five kinds of
hard-heartedness they've given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they've severed? Firstly, a
mendicant is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind inclines toward
keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the first
shackle of the heart they've severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant is rid of greed for the body ...

They're rid of greed for form ...

They don't eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then
indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and drowsing ...

They don't lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one of the
orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and
striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart they've severed. These
are the five shackles of the heart they've severed.

When a mendicant has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and
severed these five shackles of the heart, it is possible for them to
achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and
training.[407](endnotes.xhtml_note-407){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-407
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort
...[408](endnotes.xhtml_note-408){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-408
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort
...[409](endnotes.xhtml_note-409){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-409
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to mental development, and active effort
...[410](endnotes.xhtml_note-410){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-410
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And the fifth is sheer
vigor.[411](endnotes.xhtml_note-411){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-411
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A mendicant who possesses these fifteen
factors, including vigor, is capable of breaking out, becoming awakened,
and reaching the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke.[412](endnotes.xhtml_note-412){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-412
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a chicken with eight or
ten or twelve
eggs.[413](endnotes.xhtml_note-413){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-413
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And she properly sat on them to keep them
warm and incubated. Even if that chicken doesn't wish: 'If only my
chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and
hatch safely!' Still they can break out and hatch safely.

In the same way, a mendicant who possesses these fifteen factors,
including vigor, is capable of breaking out, becoming awakened, and
reaching the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn17">

### [MN 17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Jungle Thickets ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vanapatthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition about jungle
thickets.[414](endnotes.xhtml_note-414){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-414
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, take the case of a mendicant who lives close by a jungle
thicket.[415](endnotes.xhtml_note-415){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-415
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, their mindfulness does not
become established, their mind does not become immersed in samādhi,
their defilements do not come to an end, and they do not arrive at the
supreme sanctuary from the
yoke.[416](endnotes.xhtml_note-416){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-416
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the necessities of life that a
renunciate requires---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick---are hard to come by. That mendicant should
reflect: 'While living close by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness does
not become established, my mind does not become immersed in samādhi, my
defilements do not come to an end, and I do not arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. And the necessities of life that a renunciate
requires---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---are hard to come by.' That mendicant should leave that jungle
thicket that very time of night or day; they should not stay there.

Take another case of a mendicant who lives close by a jungle thicket.
Their mindfulness does not become established ... But the necessities of
life are easy to come by. That mendicant should reflect: 'While living
close by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness does not become established
... But the necessities of life are easy to come by. But I didn't go
forth from the lay life to homelessness for the sake of a robe,
almsfood, lodgings, or medicines and supplies for the sick. Moreover,
while living close by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness does not
become established ...' That mendicant should, after appraisal, leave
that jungle thicket; they should not stay
there.[417](endnotes.xhtml_note-417){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-417
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take another case of a mendicant who lives close by a jungle thicket. As
they do so, their mindfulness becomes established, their mind becomes
immersed in samādhi, their defilements come to an end, and they arrive
at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. But the necessities of life that
a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick---are hard to come by. That mendicant should
reflect: 'While living close by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness
becomes established ... But the necessities of life are hard to come by.
But I didn't go forth from the lay life to homelessness for the sake of
a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or medicines and supplies for the sick.
Moreover, while living close by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness
becomes established ...' That mendicant should, after appraisal, stay in
that jungle thicket; they should not
leave.[418](endnotes.xhtml_note-418){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-418
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take another case of a mendicant who lives close by a jungle thicket.
Their mindfulness becomes established ... And the necessities of life
are easy to come by. That mendicant should reflect: 'While living close
by this jungle thicket, my mindfulness becomes established ... And the
necessities of life are easy to come by.' That mendicant should stay in
that jungle thicket for the rest of their life; they should not leave.

Take the case of a mendicant who lives supported by a village
...[419](endnotes.xhtml_note-419){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-419
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} town ... city ... country ... an
individual. As they do so, their mindfulness does not become
established, their mind does not become immersed in samādhi, their
defilements do not come to an end, and they do not arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. And the necessities of life that a renunciate
requires---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---are hard to come by. That mendicant should reflect: '... my
mindfulness does not become established ... And the necessities of life
are hard to come by.' That mendicant should leave that person at any
time of the day or night, without taking leave; they should not follow
them.
...[420](endnotes.xhtml_note-420){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-420
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take another case of a mendicant who lives supported by an individual.
Their mindfulness does not become established ... But the necessities of
life are easy to come by. That mendicant should reflect: '... my
mindfulness does not become established ... But the necessities of life
are easy to come by.' ... That mendicant should, after appraisal, leave
that person having taken leave; they should not follow them. ...

Take another case of a mendicant who lives supported by an individual.
Their mindfulness becomes established ... But the necessities of life
are hard to come by. That mendicant should reflect: '... my mindfulness
becomes established ... But the necessities of life are hard to come
by.' ... That mendicant should, after appraisal, follow that person;
they should not leave.

Take another case of a mendicant who lives supported by an individual.
As they do so, their mindfulness becomes established, their mind becomes
immersed in samādhi, their defilements come to an end, and they arrive
at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. And the necessities of life that
a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick---are easy to come by. That mendicant should
reflect: 'While living supported by this person, my mindfulness becomes
established ... And the necessities of life are easy to come by.' That
mendicant should follow that person for the rest of their life; they
should not leave them, even if sent
away."[421](endnotes.xhtml_note-421){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-421
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn18">

### [MN 18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Honey-Cake ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Madhupiṇḍikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[422](endnotes.xhtml_note-422){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-422
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree
Monastery.[423](endnotes.xhtml_note-423){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-423
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kapilavatthu for
alms.[424](endnotes.xhtml_note-424){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-424
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu. After
the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Great Wood for
the day's
meditation,[425](endnotes.xhtml_note-425){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-425
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} plunged deep into it, and sat at the root
of a young wood apple tree to meditate.

Daṇḍapāṇi the Sakyan, while going for a
walk,[426](endnotes.xhtml_note-426){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-426
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} plunged deep into the Great Wood. He
approached the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side
leaning on his staff, and said to the Buddha, "What is the ascetic's
doctrine? What does he
assert?"[427](endnotes.xhtml_note-427){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-427
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, my doctrine is such that one does not conflict with anyone in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. And it is such that
perceptions do not underlie the brahmin who lives detached from sensual
pleasures, without doubting, stripped of worry, and rid of craving for
rebirth in this or that
state.[428](endnotes.xhtml_note-428){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-428
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is my doctrine, and that is what I
assert."

When he had spoken, Daṇḍapāṇi shook his head, waggled his tongue, raised
his eyebrows until his brow puckered in three furrows, and he departed
leaning on his
staff.[429](endnotes.xhtml_note-429){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-429
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the Banyan Tree Monastery, sat down on the seat spread out, and told the
mendicants what had happened.

When he had spoken, one of the mendicants said to him, "But sir,
asserting what doctrine does the Buddha not conflict with anyone in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans?[430](endnotes.xhtml_note-430){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-430
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how is it that perceptions do not
underlie the Buddha, the brahmin who lives detached from sensual
pleasures, without indecision, stripped of worry, and rid of craving for
rebirth in this or that
state?"[431](endnotes.xhtml_note-431){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-431
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mendicant, judgments driven by proliferating perceptions beset a
person.[432](endnotes.xhtml_note-432){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-432
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they don't find anything worth
approving, welcoming, or getting attached to in the source from which
these
arise,[433](endnotes.xhtml_note-433){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-433
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} just this is the end of the underlying
tendencies to desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, the desire to be
reborn, and ignorance. This is the end of taking up the rod and the
sword, the end of quarrels, arguments, and disputes, of accusations,
divisive speech, and
lies.[434](endnotes.xhtml_note-434){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-434
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is where these bad, unskillful
qualities cease without anything left
over."[435](endnotes.xhtml_note-435){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-435
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his
dwelling.[436](endnotes.xhtml_note-436){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-436
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. Who can explain in detail the meaning
of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought, "This Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by
the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual
companions.[437](endnotes.xhtml_note-437){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-437
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He is capable of explaining in detail the
meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha. Let's go to
him, and ask him about this matter."

Then those mendicants went to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with
him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down
to one side. They told him what had happened, and said: "May Venerable
Mahākaccāna please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves. Such is the
consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the
Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me about this
matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer. Still, Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha and
esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. You are capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākaccāna said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in
detail:[438](endnotes.xhtml_note-438){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-438
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Judgments driven by proliferating
perceptions beset a person. If they don't find anything worth approving,
welcoming, or getting attached to in the source from which these arise,
just this is the end of the underlying tendencies to desire, repulsion,
views, doubt, conceit, the desire to be reborn, and ignorance. This is
the end of taking up the rod and the sword, the end of quarrels,
arguments, and disputes, of accusations, divisive speech, and lies. This
is where these bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.' This is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary
recital.

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. What you feel,
you perceive. What you perceive, you think about. What you think about,
you proliferate. What you proliferate is the source from which judgments
driven by proliferating perceptions beset a person. This occurs with
respect to sights known by the eye in the past, future, and
present.[439](endnotes.xhtml_note-439){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-439
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. ...

Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. ...

Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. ...

Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. What you
feel, you perceive. What you perceive, you think about. What you think
about, you proliferate. What you proliferate is the source from which
judgments driven by proliferating perceptions beset a person. This
occurs with respect to ideas known by the mind in the past, future, and
present.[440](endnotes.xhtml_note-440){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-440
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Where there is the eye, sights, and eye consciousness, it will be
possible to discover evidence of
contact.[441](endnotes.xhtml_note-441){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-441
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Where there is evidence of contact, it will
be possible to discover evidence of feeling. Where there is evidence of
feeling, it will be possible to discover evidence of perception. Where
there is evidence of perception, it will be possible to discover
evidence of thought. Where there is evidence of thought, it will be
possible to discover evidence of being beset by judgments driven by
proliferating perceptions.

Where there is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, ideas, and
mind consciousness, it will be possible to discover evidence of contact.
... Where there is evidence of contact, it will be possible to discover
evidence of feeling. Where there is evidence of feeling, it will be
possible to discover evidence of perception. Where there is evidence of
perception, it will be possible to discover evidence of thinking. Where
there is evidence of thinking, it will be possible to discover evidence
of being beset by judgments driven by proliferating perceptions.

Where there is no eye, no sights, and no eye consciousness, it will not
be possible to discover evidence of contact. Where there is no evidence
of contact, it will not be possible to discover evidence of feeling.
Where there is no evidence of feeling, it will not be possible to
discover evidence of perception. Where there is no evidence of
perception, it will not be possible to discover evidence of thinking.
Where there is no evidence of thinking, it will not be possible to
discover evidence of being beset by judgments driven by proliferating
perceptions.

Where there is no ear ... no nose ... no tongue ... no body ... no mind,
no ideas, and no mind consciousness, it will not be possible to discover
evidence of contact. Where there is no evidence of contact, it will not
be possible to discover evidence of feeling. Where there is no evidence
of feeling, it will not be possible to discover evidence of perception.
Where there is no evidence of perception, it will not be possible to
discover evidence of thinking. Where there is no evidence of thinking,
it will not be possible to discover evidence of being beset by judgments
driven by proliferating perceptions.

This is how I understand the detailed meaning of that brief summary
recital given by the Buddha. If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and
ask him about this. You should remember it in line with the Buddha's
answer."

Then those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what Mahākaccāna
said, rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened, adding: "Mahākaccāna clearly
explained the meaning to us in this manner, with these words and
phrases."

"Mahākaccāna is astute, mendicants, he has great wisdom. If you came to
me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as
Mahākaccāna. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember
it."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, suppose a
person who was weak with hunger was to obtain a honey-cake. Wherever
they taste it, they would enjoy a sweet, delicious
flavor.[442](endnotes.xhtml_note-442){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-442
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, wherever a sincere, capable mendicant might examine
with wisdom the meaning of this exposition of the teaching they would
only gain joy and clarity. Sir, what is the name of this exposition of
the teaching?"

"Well then, Ānanda, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as
'The Honey-Cake Discourse'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn19">

### [MN 19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Two Kinds of Thought ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dvedhāvitakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[443](endnotes.xhtml_note-443){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-443
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I
thought:[444](endnotes.xhtml_note-444){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-444
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Why don't I meditate by continually
dividing my thoughts into two classes?' So I assigned sensual,
malicious, and cruel
thoughts[445](endnotes.xhtml_note-445){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-445
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} to one class. And I assigned thoughts of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness to the second class.

Then, as I meditated---diligent, keen, and resolute---a sensual thought
arose. I understood: 'This sensual thought has arisen in
me.[446](endnotes.xhtml_note-446){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-446
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It leads to hurting myself, hurting others,
and hurting both. It blocks wisdom, it's on the side of anguish, and it
doesn't lead to
extinguishment.'[447](endnotes.xhtml_note-447){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-447
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When I reflected that it leads to hurting
myself, it went
away.[448](endnotes.xhtml_note-448){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-448
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When I reflected that it leads to hurting
others, it went away. When I reflected that it leads to hurting both, it
went away. When I reflected that it blocks wisdom, it's on the side of
anguish, and it doesn't lead to extinguishment, it went away. So I gave
up, got rid of, and eliminated any sensual thoughts that arose.

Then, as I meditated---diligent, keen, and resolute---a malicious
thought arose
...[449](endnotes.xhtml_note-449){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-449
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} a cruel thought arose. I understood: 'This
cruel thought has arisen in me. It leads to hurting myself, hurting
others, and hurting both. It blocks wisdom, it's on the side of anguish,
and it doesn't lead to extinguishment.' When I reflected that it leads
to hurting myself ... hurting others ... hurting both, it went away.
When I reflected that it blocks wisdom, it's on the side of anguish, and
it doesn't lead to extinguishment, it went away. So I gave up, got rid
of, and eliminated any cruel thoughts that arose.

Whatever a mendicant frequently thinks about and considers becomes their
heart's
inclination.[450](endnotes.xhtml_note-450){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-450
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they often think about and consider
sensual thoughts, they've given up the thought of renunciation to
cultivate sensual thought. Their mind inclines to sensual thoughts. If
they often think about and consider malicious thoughts ... their mind
inclines to malicious thoughts. If they often think about and consider
cruel thoughts ... their mind inclines to cruel thoughts.

Suppose it's the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the
crops grow closely together, and a cowherd must take care of the
cattle.[451](endnotes.xhtml_note-451){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-451
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He'd tap and poke them with his staff on
this side and that to keep them in check. Why is that? For he sees that
if they wander into the crops he could be executed, imprisoned, fined,
or
condemned.[452](endnotes.xhtml_note-452){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-452
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, I saw that unskillful qualities have the drawbacks of
sordidness and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit
and cleansing power of renunciation.

Then, as I meditated---diligent, keen, and resolute---a thought of
renunciation arose. I understood: 'This thought of renunciation has
arisen in me. It doesn't lead to hurting myself, hurting others, or
hurting both. It nourishes wisdom, it's on the side of freedom from
anguish, and it leads to extinguishment.' If I were to keep on thinking
and considering this all night ... all day ... all night and day, I see
no danger that would come from
that.[453](endnotes.xhtml_note-453){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-453
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Still, thinking and considering for too
long would tire my body. And when the body is tired, the mind is
stressed. And when the mind is stressed, it's far from
immersion.[454](endnotes.xhtml_note-454){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-454
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I stilled, settled, unified, and
immersed my mind
internally.[455](endnotes.xhtml_note-455){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-455
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? So that my mind would not be
stressed.

Then, as I meditated---diligent, keen, and resolute---a thought of good
will arose ... a thought of harmlessness arose. I understood: 'This
thought of harmlessness has arisen in me. It doesn't lead to hurting
myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It nourishes wisdom, it's on
the side of freedom from anguish, and it leads to extinguishment.' If I
were to keep on thinking and considering this all night ... all day ...
all night and day, I see no danger that would come from that. Still,
thinking and considering for too long would tire my body. And when the
body is tired, the mind is stressed. And when the mind is stressed, it's
far from immersion. So I stilled, settled, unified, and immersed my mind
internally. Why is that? So that my mind would not be stressed.

Whatever a mendicant frequently thinks about and considers becomes their
heart's inclination. If they often think about and consider thoughts of
renunciation, they've given up sensual thought to cultivate the thought
of renunciation. Their mind inclines to thoughts of renunciation. If
they often think about and consider thoughts of good will ... their mind
inclines to thoughts of good will. If they often think about and
consider thoughts of harmlessness ... their mind inclines to thoughts of
harmlessness.

Suppose it's the last month of summer, when all the crops have been
gathered within a village, and a cowherd must take care of the cattle.
While at the root of a tree or in the open he need only be mindful that
the cattle are there. In the same way I needed only to be mindful that
those things were
there.[456](endnotes.xhtml_note-456){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-456
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established
and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was
immersed in
samādhi.[457](endnotes.xhtml_note-457){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-457
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it
connected.[458](endnotes.xhtml_note-458){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-458
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I
entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[459](endnotes.xhtml_note-459){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-459
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third
absorption, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.'[460](endnotes.xhtml_note-460){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-460
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former
happiness and sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.[461](endnotes.xhtml_note-461){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-461
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection of past lives. I
recollected many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.[462](endnotes.xhtml_note-462){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-462
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had become immersed in samādhi like this, I extended it
toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. With
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings
are reborn according to their deeds.

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had become immersed in samādhi like this, I extended it
toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. I truly understood: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering.\'

I truly understood: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements.\' Knowing and
seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. I understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the
spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done;
there is nothing further for this place.'

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

Suppose that in a forested wilderness there was an expanse of low-lying
marshes, and a large herd of deer lived nearby. Then along comes a
person who wants to harm, injure, and threaten them. They close off the
safe, secure path that leads to happiness, and open the wrong path.
There they plant domesticated male and female deer as decoys so that, in
due course, that herd of deer would fall to ruin and disaster. Then
along comes a person who wants to help keep the herd of deer safe. They
open up the safe, secure path that leads to happiness, and close off the
wrong path. They get rid of the decoys so that, in due course, that herd
of deer would grow, increase, and mature.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is what it means. 'An
expanse of low-lying marshes' is a term for sensual
pleasures.[463](endnotes.xhtml_note-463){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-463
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A large herd of deer' is a term for
sentient beings. 'A person who wants to harm, injure, and threaten them'
is a term for Māra the Wicked. 'The wrong path' is a term for the wrong
eightfold path, that is, wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion. 'A domesticated male deer' is a term for greed and relishing.
'A domesticated female deer' is a term for ignorance. 'A person who
wants to help keep the herd of deer safe' is a term for the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 'The safe, secure
path that leads to happiness' is a term for the noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

So, mendicants, I have opened up the safe, secure path to happiness and
closed off the wrong path. And I have got rid of the male and female
decoys.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be negligent!
Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn20">

### [MN 20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [How to Stop Thinking ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitakkasaṇṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on
five subjects from time to
time.[464](endnotes.xhtml_note-464){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-464
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five?

Take a mendicant who is focusing on some subject that gives rise to bad,
unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate, and delusion. That
mendicant should focus on some other subject connected with the
skillful.[465](endnotes.xhtml_note-465){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-465
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, those bad thoughts are given
up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. It's like a deft
carpenter or their apprentice who'd knock out or extract a large peg
with a finer peg. In the same way, a mendicant ... should focus on some
other basis of meditation connected with the skillful ...

Now, suppose that mendicant is focusing on some other subject connected
with the skillful, but bad, unskillful thoughts connected with desire,
hate, and delusion keep coming up. They should examine the drawbacks of
those
thoughts:[466](endnotes.xhtml_note-466){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-466
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'So these thoughts are unskillful, they're
blameworthy, and they result in
suffering.'[467](endnotes.xhtml_note-467){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-467
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, those bad thoughts are given
up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. Suppose there was a
woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments. If the
carcass of a snake or a dog or a human were hung around their neck,
they'd be horrified, repelled, and disgusted. In the same way, a
mendicant ... should examine the drawbacks of those thoughts ...

Now, suppose that mendicant is examining the drawbacks of those
thoughts, but bad, unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate, and
delusion keep coming up. They should try to forget and ignore
them.[468](endnotes.xhtml_note-468){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-468
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, those bad thoughts are given
up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. Suppose there was a
person with clear eyes, and some undesirable sights came into their
range of vision. They'd just close their eyes or look away. In the same
way, a mendicant ... those bad thoughts are given up and come to an end
...[469](endnotes.xhtml_note-469){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-469
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, suppose that mendicant is ignoring and forgetting about those
thoughts, but bad, unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate, and
delusion keep coming up. They should focus on stopping the formation of
thoughts.[470](endnotes.xhtml_note-470){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-470
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, those bad thoughts are given
up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. Suppose there was a
person walking
quickly.[471](endnotes.xhtml_note-471){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-471
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd think: 'Why am I walking so quickly?
Why don't I slow down?' So they'd slow
down.[472](endnotes.xhtml_note-472){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-472
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd think: 'Why am I walking slowly? Why
don't I stand still?' So they'd stand still. They'd think: 'Why am I
standing still? Why don't I sit down?' So they'd sit down. They'd think:
'Why am I sitting? Why don't I lie down?' So they'd lie down. And so
that person would reject successively coarser postures and adopt more
subtle ones.

In the same way, a mendicant ... those thoughts are given up and come to
an end ...

Now, suppose that mendicant is focusing on stopping the formation of
thoughts, but bad, unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate, and
delusion keep coming up. With teeth clenched and tongue pressed against
the roof of the mouth, they should squeeze, squash, and crush mind with
mind.[473](endnotes.xhtml_note-473){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-473
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they do so, those bad thoughts are given
up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. It's like a strong
man who grabs a weaker man by the head or throat or shoulder and
squeezes, squashes, and crushes them. In the same way, a mendicant ...
with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the roof of the mouth,
should squeeze, squash, and crush mind with mind. As they do so, those
bad thoughts are given up and come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled
internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi.

Now, take the mendicant who is focusing on some subject that gives rise
to bad, unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate, and delusion.
They focus on some other subject connected with the skillful ... They
examine the drawbacks of those thoughts ... They try to forget and
ignore about those thoughts ... They focus on stopping the formation of
thoughts ... With teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the roof of
the mouth, they squeeze, squash, and crush mind with mind. When they
succeed in each of these things, those bad thoughts are given up and
come to an end. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it settles,
unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. This is called a mendicant who
is a master of the ways of thought. They will think what they want to
think, and they won't think what they don't want to think. They've cut
off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit
have made an end of
suffering."[474](endnotes.xhtml_note-474){#mn-sihanadavagga.xhtml_noteref-474
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-opammavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter of Similes {#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_mn-opammavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn21">

### [MN 21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Saw ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kakacūpamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time, Venerable Phagguna of the Top-Knot was spending too
long mixing closely with some
nuns.[475](endnotes.xhtml_note-475){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-475
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So much so that if any mendicant criticized
those nuns in his presence, Phagguna of the Top-Knot got angry and
upset, and even instigated disciplinary
proceedings.[476](endnotes.xhtml_note-476){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-476
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And if any mendicant criticized Phagguna of
the Top-Knot in their presence, those nuns got angry and upset, and even
instigated disciplinary proceedings. That's how close Phagguna of the
Top-Knot was with those nuns.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what was going on.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
the mendicant Phagguna of the Top-Knot that the teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Phagguna of the Top-Knot and
said to him, "Reverend Phagguna, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Phagguna replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Is it really true, Phagguna, that you've been spending too long mixing
closely with some nuns? So much so that if any mendicant criticizes
those nuns in your presence, you get angry and upset, and even instigate
disciplinary proceedings? And if any mendicant criticizes you in those
nuns' presence, they get angry and upset, and even instigate
disciplinary proceedings? Is that how close you've become with those
nuns?"

"Yes, sir."

"Phagguna, are you not a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from
the lay life to homelessness?"

"Yes, sir."

"As such, it's not appropriate for you to mix so closely with those
nuns. So if anyone criticizes those nuns in your presence, you should
give up any desires or thoughts of the lay life. If that happens, you
should train like this: 'My mind will not degenerate. I will blurt out
no bad words. I will remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and
no secret hate.' That's how you should train.

So even if someone strikes those nuns with fists, stones, rods, and
swords in your presence, you should give up any desires or thoughts of
the lay
life.[477](endnotes.xhtml_note-477){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-477
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that happens, you should train like
this: 'My mind will not degenerate. I will blurt out no bad words. I
will remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate.'
That's how you should train.

So if anyone criticizes you in your presence, you should give up any
desires or thoughts of the lay
life.[478](endnotes.xhtml_note-478){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-478
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that happens, you should train like
this: 'My mind will not degenerate. I will blurt out no bad words. I
will remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate.'
That's how you should train.

So Phagguna, even if someone strikes you with fists, stones, rods, and
swords, you should give up any desires or thoughts of the lay
life.[479](endnotes.xhtml_note-479){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-479
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that happens, you should train like
this: 'My mind will not degenerate. I will blurt out no bad words. I
will remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate.'
That's how you should train."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I used to be satisfied with the mendicants. Once, I
addressed them: 'I eat my food in one sitting per
day.[480](endnotes.xhtml_note-480){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-480
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Doing so, I find that I'm healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. You too should eat your food in
one sitting per day. Doing so, you'll find that you're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably.' I didn't have to keep on
instructing those mendicants; I just had to prompt their
mindfulness.[481](endnotes.xhtml_note-481){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-481
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad
ready.[482](endnotes.xhtml_note-482){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-482
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A deft horse trainer, a master charioteer,
might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand and goad in
the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes, whenever he
wishes.

In the same way, I didn't have to keep on instructing those mendicants;
I just had to prompt their mindfulness. So, mendicants, you too should
give up what's unskillful and devote yourselves to skillful qualities.
In this way you'll achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this
teaching and training.

Suppose that not far from a town or village there was a large grove of
sal
trees[483](endnotes.xhtml_note-483){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-483
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that was choked with castor-oil weeds. Then
along comes a person who wants to help protect and nurture that grove.
They'd cut down the crooked sal saplings that were robbing the sap, and
throw them out. They'd clean up the interior of the grove, and properly
care for the straight, well-formed sal saplings. In this way, in due
course, that sal grove would grow, increase, and mature.

In the same way, mendicants, you too should give up what's unskillful
and devote yourselves to skillful qualities. In this way you'll achieve
growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.

Once upon a time, mendicants, right here in Sāvatthī there was a
housewife named
Vedehikā.[484](endnotes.xhtml_note-484){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-484
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} She had this good reputation: 'The
housewife Vedehikā is sweet, even-tempered, and
calm.'[485](endnotes.xhtml_note-485){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-485
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, Vedehikā had a bonded maid named Kāḷī
who was deft, tireless, and well-organized in her
work.[486](endnotes.xhtml_note-486){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-486
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Kāḷī thought, 'My mistress has a good reputation as being sweet,
even-tempered, and calm. But does she actually have anger in her and
just not show it? Or does she have no anger? Or is it just because my
work is well-organized that she doesn't show anger, even though she
still has it inside? Why don't I test my
mistress?'[487](endnotes.xhtml_note-487){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-487
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So Kāḷī got up during the day. Vedehikā said to her, 'Oi wench,
Kāḷī!'[488](endnotes.xhtml_note-488){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-488
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'What is it,
ma'am?'[489](endnotes.xhtml_note-489){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-489
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'You're getting up in the day---what's up with you, wench?'

'Nothing, ma'am.'

'Oh, so nothing's up, you naughty maid, but you get up in the day!'
Angry and upset, she scowled.

Then Kāḷī thought, 'My mistress actually has anger in her and just
doesn't show it; it's not that she has no anger. It's just because my
work is well-organized that she doesn't show anger, even though she
still has it inside. Why don't I test my mistress further?'

So Kāḷī got up later in the day. Vedehikā said to her, 'Oi wench, Kāḷī!'

'What is it, ma'am?'

'You're getting up later in the day---what's up with you, wench?'

'Nothing, ma'am.'

'Oh, so nothing's up, you naughty maid, but you get up later in the
day!' Angry and upset, she blurted out angry words.

Then Kāḷī thought, 'My mistress actually has anger in her and just
doesn't show it; it's not that she has no anger. It's just because my
work is well-organized that she doesn't show anger, even though she
still has it inside. Why don't I test my mistress further?'

So Kāḷī got up even later in the
day.[490](endnotes.xhtml_note-490){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-490
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Vedehikā said to her, 'Oi wench, Kāḷī!'

'What is it, ma'am?'

'You're getting up even later in the day---what's up with you, wench?'

'Nothing, ma'am.'

'Oh, so nothing's up, you naughty maid, but you get up even later in the
day!' Angry and upset, she grabbed a door-pin and hit Kāḷī on the head,
cracking it
open.[491](endnotes.xhtml_note-491){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-491
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Kāḷī, with blood pouring from her cracked skull, denounced her
mistress to the neighbors, 'See, ladies, what the sweet one did! See
what the even-tempered one did! See what the calm one did! How on earth
can she grab a door-pin and hit her only maid on the head, cracking it
open, just for getting up
late?'[492](endnotes.xhtml_note-492){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-492
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then after some time the housewife Vedehikā got this bad reputation:
'The housewife Vedehikā is fierce, ill-tempered, and not calm at
all.'[493](endnotes.xhtml_note-493){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-493
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a mendicant may be the sweetest of the sweet, the most
even-tempered of the even-tempered, the calmest of the calm, so long as
they don't encounter any disagreeable criticism. But it's when they
encounter disagreeable criticism that you'll know whether they're really
sweet, even-tempered, and calm. I don't say that a mendicant is easy to
admonish if they make themselves easy to admonish only for the sake of
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Why
is that? Because when they don't get robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick, they're no longer easy to admonish.
But when a mendicant is easy to admonish purely because they honor,
respect, revere, worship, and venerate the teaching, then I say that
they're easy to admonish. So, mendicants, you should train yourselves:
'We will be easy to admonish purely because we honor, respect, revere,
worship, and venerate the teaching.' That's how you should train.

Mendicants, there are these five ways in which others might criticize
you.[494](endnotes.xhtml_note-494){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-494
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their speech may be timely or untimely,
true or false, gentle or harsh, beneficial or harmful, from a heart of
love or from secret hate. When others criticize you, they may do so in
any of these ways. If that happens, you should train like this: 'Our
minds will not degenerate. We will blurt out no bad words. We will
remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate. We
will meditate spreading a heart of love to that person. And with them as
a basis, we will meditate spreading a heart full of love to everyone in
the world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.'[495](endnotes.xhtml_note-495){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-495
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how you should train.

Suppose a person was to come along carrying a spade and basket and say,
'I shall make this great earth be without earth!' And they'd dig all
over, scatter all over, spit all over, and urinate all over, saying, 'Be
without earth! Be without earth!'

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person make this great earth
be without earth?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because this great earth is deep and limitless.
It's not easy to make it be without earth. That person will eventually
get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, there are these five ways in which others might
criticize you. Their speech may be timely or untimely, true or false,
gentle or harsh, beneficial or harmful, from a heart of love or from
secret hate. When others criticize you, they may do so in any of these
ways. If that happens, you should train like this: 'Our minds will not
degenerate. We will blurt out no bad words. We will remain full of
sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate. We will meditate
spreading a heart of love to that person. And with them as a basis, we
will meditate spreading a heart like the earth to everyone in the
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.'
That's how you should train.

Suppose a person was to come along with dye such as red lac, turmeric,
indigo, or rose madder, and say, 'I shall draw pictures in space, making
pictures appear there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person draw pictures in
space?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because space has no form or
appearance.[496](endnotes.xhtml_note-496){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-496
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's not easy to draw pictures there. That
person will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, if others criticize you in any of these five ways ...
you should train like this: '... We will meditate spreading a heart of
love to that person. And with them as a basis, we will meditate
spreading a heart like space to everyone in the world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.' That's how you
should train.

Suppose a person was to come along carrying a blazing grass torch, and
say, 'I shall burn and scorch the river Ganges with this blazing grass
torch.'

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person burn and scorch the
river Ganges with a blazing grass torch?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because the river Ganges is deep and limitless.
It's not easy to burn and scorch it with a blazing grass torch. That
person will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, if others criticize you in any of these five ways ...
you should train like this: '... We will meditate spreading a heart of
love to that person. And with them as a basis, we will meditate
spreading a heart like the Ganges to everyone in the world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.' That's how you
should train.

Suppose there was a catskin bag that was rubbed, well-rubbed, very
well-rubbed, soft, silky, rid of rustling and crackling. Then a person
comes along carrying a stick or a stone, and says, 'I shall make this
soft catskin bag rustle and crackle with this stick or stone.'

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person make that soft catskin
bag rustle and crackle with that stick or stone?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because that catskin bag is rubbed, well-rubbed,
very well-rubbed, soft, silky, rid of rustling and crackling. It's not
easy to make it rustle or crackle with a stick or stone. That person
will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, there are these five ways in which others might
criticize you. Their speech may be timely or untimely, true or false,
gentle or harsh, beneficial or harmful, from a heart of love or from
secret hate. When others criticize you, they may do so in any of these
ways. If that happens, you should train like this: 'Our minds will not
degenerate. We will blurt out no bad words. We will remain full of
sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate. We will meditate
spreading a heart of love to that person. And with them as a basis, we
will meditate spreading a heart like a catskin bag to everyone in the
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.'
That's how you should train.

Even if low-down bandits were to sever you limb from limb with a
two-handed saw, anyone who had a malevolent thought on that account
would not be following my
instructions.[497](endnotes.xhtml_note-497){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-497
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that happens, you should train like
this: 'Our minds will not degenerate. We will blurt out no bad words. We
will remain full of sympathy, with a heart of love and no secret hate.
We will meditate spreading a heart of love to that person. And with them
as a basis, we will meditate spreading a heart full of love to everyone
in the world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.' That's how you should train.

If you frequently reflect on this advice on the simile of the
saw,[498](endnotes.xhtml_note-498){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-498
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} do you see any criticism, large or small,
that you could not endure?"

"No, sir."

"So, mendicants, you should frequently reflect on this advice on the
simile of the saw. This will be for your lasting welfare and happiness."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn22">

### [MN 22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Cobra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Alagaddūpamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time a mendicant called Ariṭṭha, who had previously been a
vulture trapper, had the following harmful
misconception:[499](endnotes.xhtml_note-499){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-499
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "As I understand the Buddha's teaching, the
acts that he says are obstructions are not really obstructions for the
one who performs
them."[500](endnotes.xhtml_note-500){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-500
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Several mendicants heard about this. They went up to Ariṭṭha and said to
him, "Is it really true, Reverend Ariṭṭha, that you have such a harmful
misconception: 'As I understand the Buddha's teaching, the acts that he
says are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who
performs them'?"

"Absolutely, reverends. As I understand the Buddha's teaching, the acts
that he says are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one
who performs them."

Then, wishing to dissuade Ariṭṭha from his view, the mendicants pursued,
pressed, and grilled
him,[501](endnotes.xhtml_note-501){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-501
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Don't say that, Ariṭṭha! Don't
misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha is not
good. And the Buddha would not say
that.[502](endnotes.xhtml_note-502){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-502
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In many ways the Buddha has said that
obstructive acts are obstructive, and that they really do obstruct the
one who performs
them.[503](endnotes.xhtml_note-503){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-503
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha says that sensual pleasures give
little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all
the more full of drawbacks. With the similes of a skeleton
...[504](endnotes.xhtml_note-504){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-504
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit
of glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ...
a butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks."

But even though the mendicants pursued, pressed, and grilled him in this
way, Ariṭṭha obstinately stuck to his misconception and insisted on it.

When they weren't able to dissuade Ariṭṭha from his view, the mendicants
went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had
happened.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
the mendicant Ariṭṭha, formerly a vulture trapper, that the teacher
summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Ariṭṭha and said to him,
"Reverend Ariṭṭha, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Ariṭṭha replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him,

"Is it really true, Ariṭṭha, that you have such a harmful misconception:
'As I understand the Buddha's teaching, the acts that he says are
obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs
them'?"

"Absolutely, sir. As I understand the Buddha's teaching, the acts that
he says are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who
performs
them."[505](endnotes.xhtml_note-505){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-505
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Futile man, who on earth have you ever known me to teach in that way?
Haven't I said in many ways that obstructive acts are obstructive, and
that they really do obstruct the one who performs them? I've said that
sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and
distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the similes
of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of glowing
coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a butcher's
knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's head, I've
said that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. But still you
misrepresent me by your wrong grasp, harm yourself, and create much
wickedness. This will be for your lasting harm and
suffering."[506](endnotes.xhtml_note-506){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-506
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "What do you think, mendicants?
Has this mendicant Ariṭṭha kindled even a spark of ardor in this
teaching and
training?"[507](endnotes.xhtml_note-507){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-507
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How could that be, sir? No, sir." When this was said, Ariṭṭha sat
silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing
to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said, "Futile man, you will be known by your
own harmful misconception. I'll question the mendicants about this."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you understand
my teaching as Ariṭṭha does, when he misrepresents me by his wrong
grasp, harms himself, and creates much wickedness?"

"No, sir. For in many ways the Buddha has told us that obstructive acts
are obstructive, and that they really do obstruct the one who performs
them. The Buddha has said that sensual pleasures give little
gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more
full of drawbacks. With the similes of a skeleton ... a snake's head,
the Buddha has said that sensual pleasures give little gratification and
much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks."

"Good, good, mendicants! It's good that you understand my teaching like
this. For in many ways I have said that obstructive acts are obstructive
...

I've said that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much
suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. But
still this Ariṭṭha misrepresents me by his wrong grasp, harms himself,
and creates much wickedness. This will be for his lasting harm and
suffering. Truly, mendicants, it is quite impossible to perform sensual
acts without sensual desires, sensual perceptions, and sensual
thoughts.[508](endnotes.xhtml_note-508){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-508
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take a futile person who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends,
stories of past lives, amazing stories, and
elaborations.[509](endnotes.xhtml_note-509){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-509
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But they don't examine the meaning of those
teachings with wisdom, and so don't come to an acceptance of them after
deliberation.[510](endnotes.xhtml_note-510){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-510
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They memorize the teaching for the sake of
finding fault and winning
debates.[511](endnotes.xhtml_note-511){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-511
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't realize the goal for which they
memorized them. Because they're wrongly grasped, those teachings lead to
their lasting harm and suffering. Why is that? Because of their wrong
grasp of the
teachings.[512](endnotes.xhtml_note-512){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-512
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a person in need of a cobra. And while wandering in
search of a
cobra[513](endnotes.xhtml_note-513){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-513
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they'd see a big cobra, and grasp it by the
coil or the tail. But that cobra would twist back and bite them on the
hand or the arm or other major or minor limb, resulting in death or
deadly pain. Why is that? Because of their wrong grasp of the cobra.

In the same way, a futile person memorizes the teaching ... and those
teachings lead to their lasting harm and suffering. Why is that? Because
of their wrong grasp of the teachings.

Now, take a gentleman who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends,
stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And once he's
memorized them, he examines their meaning with wisdom, and comes to an
acceptance of them after
deliberation.[514](endnotes.xhtml_note-514){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-514
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He doesn't memorize the teaching for the
sake of finding fault and winning debates. He realizes the goal for
which he memorized them. Because they're correctly grasped, those
teachings lead to his lasting welfare and happiness. Why is that?
Because of his correct grasp of the teachings.

Suppose there was a person in need of a cobra. And while wandering in
search of a cobra they'd see a big cobra, and hold it down carefully
with a cleft stick. Only then would they correctly grasp it by the neck.
And even though that cobra might wrap its coils around that person's
hand or arm or some other major or minor limb, that wouldn't result in
death or deadly pain. Why is that? Because of their correct grasp of the
cobra.

In the same way, a gentleman memorizes the teaching ... and those
teachings lead to his lasting welfare and happiness. Why is that?
Because of his correct grasp of the teachings.

So, mendicants, when you understand what I've said, you should remember
it accordingly. But if I've said anything that you don't understand, you
should ask me about it, or some competent
mendicants.[515](endnotes.xhtml_note-515){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-515
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, I will teach you a simile of the teaching as a raft: for
crossing over, not for holding
on.[516](endnotes.xhtml_note-516){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-516
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They'd see a large
deluge, whose near shore was dubious and perilous, while the far shore
was a sanctuary free of peril. But there was no ferryboat or bridge for
crossing over. They'd think, 'Why don't I gather grass, sticks,
branches, and leaves and make a raft? Riding on the raft, and paddling
with my hands and feet, I can safely reach the far shore.' And so they'd
do exactly that. And when they'd crossed over to the far shore, they'd
think, 'This raft has been very helpful to me. Riding on the raft, and
paddling with my hands and feet, I have safely crossed over to the far
shore. Why don't I hoist it on my head or pick it up on my shoulder and
go wherever I want?'

What do you think, mendicants? Would that person be doing what should be
done with that raft?"

"No, sir."

"And what, mendicants, should that person do with the raft? When they'd
crossed over they should think, 'This raft has been very helpful to me.
... Why don't I beach it on dry land or set it adrift on the water and
go wherever I want?' That's what that person should do with the raft.

In the same way, I have taught a simile of the teaching as a raft: for
crossing over, not for holding on. By understanding the simile of the
raft, you will even give up the teachings, let alone what is not the
teachings.[517](endnotes.xhtml_note-517){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-517
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, there are these six grounds for
views.[518](endnotes.xhtml_note-518){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-518
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What six? Take an unlearned ordinary person
who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are
neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
regard form as: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self.'[519](endnotes.xhtml_note-519){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-519
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They also regard feeling ... perception ...
choices ... whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought,
and explored by the mind as: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self.'[520](endnotes.xhtml_note-520){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-520
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And as for this ground for views: 'The
cosmos and the self are one and the same. After death I will be that,
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and
ever.'[521](endnotes.xhtml_note-521){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-521
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They regard this also as: 'This is mine, I
am this, this is my self.'

But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
regard form like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' They also regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... whatever
is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the
mind like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'
And the same for this ground for views: 'The cosmos and the self are one
and the same. After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever.' They also regard
like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing in this way they're not anxious about what doesn't
exist."[522](endnotes.xhtml_note-522){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-522
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "Sir, can
there be anxiety about what doesn't exist
externally?"[523](endnotes.xhtml_note-523){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-523
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There can, mendicant," said the Buddha. "It's when someone thinks, 'Oh,
it once was mine but is mine no more. Oh, it could be mine but I do not
get it.' They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. That's how there is anxiety about what doesn't
exist externally."

"But can there be no anxiety about what doesn't exist externally?"

"There can, mendicant," said the Buddha. "It's when someone doesn't
think, 'Oh, it once was mine but is mine no more. Oh, it could be mine
but I do not get it.' They don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating
their breast and falling into confusion. That's how there is no anxiety
about what doesn't exist externally."

"But can there be anxiety about what doesn't exist internally?"

"There can, mendicant," said the Buddha. "It's when someone has such a
view: 'The cosmos and the self are one and the same. After death I will
be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last
forever and ever.' They hear the Realized One or their disciple teaching
Dhamma for the uprooting of all grounds, fixations, obsessions,
insistences, and underlying tendencies regarding views; for the stilling
of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.[524](endnotes.xhtml_note-524){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-524
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They think, 'Whoa, I'm going to be
annihilated and destroyed! I won't even exist any
more!'[525](endnotes.xhtml_note-525){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-525
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They sorrow and wail and lament, beating
their breast and falling into confusion. That's how there is anxiety
about what doesn't exist internally."

"But can there be no anxiety about what doesn't exist internally?"

"There can," said the Buddha. "It's when someone doesn't have such a
view: 'The cosmos and the self are one and the same. After death I will
be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last
forever and ever.' They hear the Realized One or their disciple teaching
Dhamma for the uprooting of all grounds, fixations, obsessions,
insistences, and underlying tendencies regarding views; for the stilling
of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. They don't think,
'Whoa, I'm going to be annihilated and destroyed! I won't even exist any
more!' They don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. That's how there is no anxiety about what
doesn't exist internally.

Mendicants, it would make sense to be possessive about something that's
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and
ever. But do you see any such possession?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I also can't see any such possession.

It would make sense to grasp at a theory of self that didn't give rise
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. But do you see any
such theory of self?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I also can't see any such theory of self.

It would make sense to rely on a view that didn't give rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. But do you see any such view
to rely on?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I also can't see any such view to rely on.

Mendicants, were a self to exist, would there be the thought, 'Belonging
to my self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Were what belongs to a self to exist, would there be the thought, 'My
self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"But since a self and what belongs to a self are not actually found, is
not the following a totally foolish
teaching:[526](endnotes.xhtml_note-526){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-526
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The cosmos and the self are one and the
same. After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, and will last forever and ever'?"

"How could it not, sir? It's a totally foolish teaching."

"What do you think,
mendicants?[527](endnotes.xhtml_note-527){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-527
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Is feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So, mendicants, you should truly see any kind of form at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' You should truly see any
kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle;
inferior or superior; far or near: *all* consciousness---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

Such a mendicant is one who is called 'one who has lifted the
cross-bar', 'one who has filled in the moat', 'one who has pulled up the
pillar', 'one who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one with banner
lowered and burden dropped,
detached'.[528](endnotes.xhtml_note-528){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-528
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how has a mendicant raised the
cross-bar?[529](endnotes.xhtml_note-529){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-529
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant has given up
ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has lifted the cross-bar.

And how has a mendicant filled in the
moat?[530](endnotes.xhtml_note-530){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-530
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant has given up
transmigrating through births in future lives, cut it off at the root,
made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in
the future. That's how a mendicant has filled in the moat.

And how has a mendicant pulled up the
pillar?[531](endnotes.xhtml_note-531){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-531
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant has given up craving,
cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so
it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant has pulled up
the pillar.

And how is a mendicant
unimpeded?[532](endnotes.xhtml_note-532){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-532
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant has given up the five
lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump,
obliterated them, so they're unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is unimpeded.

And how is a mendicant a noble one with with banner lowered and burden
dropped,
detached?[533](endnotes.xhtml_note-533){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-533
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant has given up the
conceit 'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is a noble one with banner lowered and burden dropped,
detached.

When a mendicant's mind was freed like this, the gods together with
Indra, Brahmā, and the Progenitor, search as they may, will not
discover:[534](endnotes.xhtml_note-534){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-534
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is the basis of that realized one's
consciousness.'[535](endnotes.xhtml_note-535){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-535
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because even in the present
life that realized one is not found, I
say.[536](endnotes.xhtml_note-536){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-536
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins
misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:
'The ascetic Gotama is an exterminator. He advocates the annihilation,
eradication, and obliteration of an existing
being.'[537](endnotes.xhtml_note-537){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-537
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They misrepresent me as what I am not, and
saying what I do not say. In the past, as today, what I describe is
suffering and the cessation of
suffering.[538](endnotes.xhtml_note-538){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-538
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This being so, if others abuse, attack,
harass, and trouble the Realized One, he doesn't get resentful, bitter,
and emotionally exasperated.

Or if others honor, respect, revere, or venerate him, he doesn't get
thrilled, elated, and emotionally
excited.[539](endnotes.xhtml_note-539){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-539
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they praise him, he just thinks, 'They
do such things for me regarding what in the past was completely
understood.'[540](endnotes.xhtml_note-540){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-540
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So, mendicants, if others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble you, don't
make yourselves resentful, bitter, and emotionally exasperated. Or if
others honor, respect, revere, or venerate you, don't make yourselves
thrilled, elated, and emotionally excited. If they praise you, just
think, 'They do such things for us regarding what in the past was
completely
understood.'[541](endnotes.xhtml_note-541){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-541
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So, mendicants, give up what isn\'t
yours.[542](endnotes.xhtml_note-542){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-542
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving it up will be for your lasting
welfare and happiness.

And what isn't yours? Form isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be
for your lasting welfare and happiness.

Feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness isn't yours: give
it up. Giving it up will be for your lasting welfare and happiness.

What do you think, mendicants? Suppose a person was to carry off the
grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in this Jeta's Grove, or burn them,
or do what they want with them. Would you think, 'This person is
carrying us off, burning us, or doing what they want with us'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because to us that's neither self nor belonging
to self."

"In the same way, mendicants, give up what isn\'t yours. Giving it up
will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours?
Form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness isn't
yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your lasting welfare and
happiness.

Thus the teaching has been well explained by me, made clear, opened,
illuminated, and stripped of
patchwork.[543](endnotes.xhtml_note-543){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-543
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In this teaching there are mendicants who
are perfected, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are
rightly freed through enlightenment. For them, there is no cycle of
rebirths to be found.
...[544](endnotes.xhtml_note-544){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-544
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this teaching there are mendicants who have given up the five lower
fetters. All of them are reborn spontaneously. They are extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world.
...[545](endnotes.xhtml_note-545){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-545
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this teaching there are mendicants who, having given up three
fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners. All
of them come back to this world once only, then make an end of
suffering. ...

In this teaching there are mendicants who have ended three fetters. All
of them are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld,
bound for awakening. ...

In this teaching there are mendicants who are followers of teachings, or
followers by faith. All of them are bound for
awakening.[546](endnotes.xhtml_note-546){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-546
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Thus the teaching has been well explained by me, made clear, opened,
illuminated, and stripped of patchwork. In this teaching there are those
who have a degree of faith and love for me. All of them are bound for
heaven."[547](endnotes.xhtml_note-547){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-547
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn23">

### [MN 23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Termite Mound ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vammikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time
Venerable Kassapa the Prince was staying in the Dark
Forest.[548](endnotes.xhtml_note-548){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-548
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Dark
Forest, went up to Kassapa the Prince, stood to one side, and
said:[549](endnotes.xhtml_note-549){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-549
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Monk, monk! This termite mound fumes by night and flames by
day.[550](endnotes.xhtml_note-550){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-550
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The brahmin said, 'Dig, clever one, having
picked up the
sword!'[551](endnotes.xhtml_note-551){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-551
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a sticking
point:[552](endnotes.xhtml_note-552){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-552
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A sticking point, sir!' The brahmin said,
'Throw out the sticking point! Dig, clever one, having picked up the
sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a
bullfrog:[553](endnotes.xhtml_note-553){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-553
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A bullfrog, sir!' The brahmin said, 'Throw
out the bullfrog! Dig, clever one, having picked up the sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a forked
path:[554](endnotes.xhtml_note-554){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-554
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A forked path, sir!' The brahmin said,
'Throw out the forked path! Dig, clever one, having picked up the
sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a filter of
ash:[555](endnotes.xhtml_note-555){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-555
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A filter of ash, sir!' The brahmin said,
'Throw out the filter of ash! Dig, clever one, having picked up the
sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a
tortoise:[556](endnotes.xhtml_note-556){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-556
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A tortoise, sir!' The brahmin said, 'Throw
out the tortoise! Dig, clever one, having taken up the sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a butcher's knife
and chopping
board:[557](endnotes.xhtml_note-557){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-557
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A butcher's knife and chopping board,
sir!' The brahmin said, 'Throw out the butcher's knife and chopping
board! Dig, clever one, having picked up the sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a scrap of
meat:[558](endnotes.xhtml_note-558){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-558
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A scrap of meat, sir!' The brahmin said,
'Throw out the scrap of meat! Dig, clever one, having picked up the
sword!'

Picking up the sword and digging, the clever one saw a mighty
serpent:[559](endnotes.xhtml_note-559){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-559
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'A mighty serpent, sir!' The brahmin said,
'Leave the mighty serpent! Do not disturb the mighty serpent! Worship
the mighty serpent!'

Mendicant, go to the Buddha and ask him about this riddle. You should
remember it in line with his answer. I don't see anyone in this
world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---who could provide a
satisfying answer to this riddle except for the Realized One or his
disciple or someone who has heard it from
them."[560](endnotes.xhtml_note-560){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-560
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what that deity said before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, Kassapa the Prince went to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then he
asked:

"Sir, what is the termite mound? What is the fuming by night and flaming
by day? Who is the brahmin, and who the clever one? What are the sword,
the digging, the sticking point, the bullfrog, the forked path, the
filter of ash, the tortoise, the butcher's knife and chopping board, and
the scrap of meat? And what is the mighty serpent?"

"Mendicant, 'termite mound' is a term for this body made up of the four
principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and
porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to
breaking up and
destruction.[561](endnotes.xhtml_note-561){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-561
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Thinking and considering all night about what you did during the
day---[562](endnotes.xhtml_note-562){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-562
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} this is the fuming at night. The work you
apply yourself to during the day by body, speech, and mind after
thinking about it all night---this is the flaming by day.

'Brahmin' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. 'Clever one' is a term for the trainee mendicant.

'Sword' is a term for noble wisdom. 'Digging' is a term for rousing
energy.

'Sticking point' is a term for ignorance. 'Throw out the sticking point'
means 'give up ignorance, dig, clever one, having picked up the sword.'

'Bullfrog' is a term for anger and
distress.[563](endnotes.xhtml_note-563){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-563
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Throw out the bullfrog' means 'give up
anger and distress' ...

'A forked path' is a term for doubt. 'Throw out the forked path' means
'give up doubt' ...

'A filter of ash' is a term for the five hindrances, that
is:[564](endnotes.xhtml_note-564){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-564
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the hindrances of sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. 'Throw out
the filter of ash' means 'give up the five hindrances' ...

'Tortoise' is a term for the five grasping aggregates, that
is:[565](endnotes.xhtml_note-565){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-565
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. 'Throw out the tortoise' means 'give up the five grasping
aggregates' ...

'Butcher's knife and chopping board' is a term for the five kinds of
sensual
stimulation.[566](endnotes.xhtml_note-566){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-566
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by
the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ...
Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. 'Throw out the butcher's knife and
chopping board' means 'give up the five kinds of sensual stimulation'
...

'Scrap of meat' is a term for greed and relishing. 'Throw out the scrap
of meat' means 'give up greed and relishing' ...

'Mighty serpent' is a term for a mendicant who has ended the
defilements. This is the meaning of: 'Leave the mighty serpent! Do not
disturb the mighty serpent! Worship the mighty serpent.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Kassapa the Prince
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn24">

### [MN 24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chariots at the Ready ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rathavinītasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.[567](endnotes.xhtml_note-567){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-567
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then several mendicants who had completed the rainy season residence in
their native land went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.
The Buddha said to
them:[568](endnotes.xhtml_note-568){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-568
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In your native land, mendicants, which of the native mendicants is
esteemed in this way: 'Personally having few wishes, they speak to the
mendicants on having few wishes. Personally having contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and
the knowledge and vision of freedom, they speak to the mendicants on all
these things. They're an adviser and counselor, one who educates,
encourages, fires up, and inspires their spiritual companions.'"

"Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī, sir, is esteemed in this way in our native
land."[569](endnotes.xhtml_note-569){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-569
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was sitting not far from the
Buddha. Then he thought:

"Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī is fortunate, so very fortunate, in that his
sensible spiritual companions praise him point by point in the presence
of the Teacher, and that the Teacher seconds that appreciation.
Hopefully, some time or other I'll get to meet Venerable Puṇṇa, and we
can have a discussion."

When the Buddha had stayed in Rājagaha as long as he pleased, he set out
for Sāvatthī. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī, where he
stayed in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Puṇṇa heard that the
Buddha had arrived at Sāvatthī.

Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out
for Sāvatthī. Eventually he came to Sāvatthī and Jeta's Grove. He went
up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk. Then, having
approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, Puṇṇa got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right. Then he went to the Dark Forest for the day's meditation.

Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and said to
him, "Reverend Sāriputta, the mendicant named Puṇṇa, of whom you have
often spoken so highly, after being inspired by a talk of the Buddha's,
left for the Dark Forest for the day's meditation."

Sāriputta quickly grabbed his sitting cloth and followed behind Puṇṇa,
keeping sight of his
head.[570](endnotes.xhtml_note-570){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-570
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Puṇṇa plunged deep into the Dark Forest and
sat at the root of a tree for the day's meditation. And Sāriputta did
likewise.

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to
Puṇṇa, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to
Puṇṇa:[571](endnotes.xhtml_note-571){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-571
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Reverend, is our spiritual life lived under the
Buddha?"[572](endnotes.xhtml_note-572){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-572
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, reverend."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of
ethics?"[573](endnotes.xhtml_note-573){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-573
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of
mind?"[574](endnotes.xhtml_note-574){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-574
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of
view?"[575](endnotes.xhtml_note-575){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-575
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification by traversing
doubt?"[576](endnotes.xhtml_note-576){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-576
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not
the
path?"[577](endnotes.xhtml_note-577){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-577
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of knowledge and vision of the
practice?"[578](endnotes.xhtml_note-578){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-578
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of
purification of knowledge and
vision?"[579](endnotes.xhtml_note-579){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-579
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Certainly not."

"When asked each of these questions, you answered, 'Certainly not.' Then
what exactly is the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
Buddha?"

"The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is
extinguishment by not
grasping."[580](endnotes.xhtml_note-580){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-580
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Reverend, is purification of ethics extinguishment by not grasping?"

"Certainly not, reverend."

"Is purification of mind ...

purification of view ...

purification by traversing doubt ...

purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not
the path ...

purification of knowledge and vision of the practice ...

Is purification of knowledge and vision extinguishment by not grasping?"

"Certainly not."

"Then is extinguishment by not grasping something apart from these
things?"

"Certainly not."

"When asked each of these questions, you answered, 'Certainly not.' How
then should we see the meaning of this statement?"

"If the Buddha had declared purification of ethics to be extinguishment
by not grasping, he would have declared that which has fuel for grasping
to be extinguishment by not
grasping.[581](endnotes.xhtml_note-581){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-581
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If the Buddha had declared purification of
mind ... purification of view ... purification by traversing doubt ...
purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not
the path ... purification of knowledge and vision of the practice ... If
the Buddha had declared purification of knowledge and vision to be
extinguishment by not grasping, he would have declared that which has
fuel for grasping to be extinguishment by not grasping. But if
extinguishment by not grasping was something apart from these things, an
ordinary person would become
extinguished.[582](endnotes.xhtml_note-582){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-582
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For an ordinary person lacks these things.

Well then, reverend, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a simile
some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Suppose that, while staying in Sāvatthī, King Pasenadi of Kosala had
some urgent business come up in Sāketa. Now, between Sāvatthī and Sāketa
seven chariots were stationed at the ready for
him.[583](endnotes.xhtml_note-583){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-583
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Pasenadi, having departed Sāvatthī,
mounted the first chariot at the ready by the gate of the royal
compound. The first chariot at the ready would bring him to the second,
where he'd dismount and mount the second chariot. The second chariot at
the ready would bring him to the third ... The third chariot at the
ready would bring him to the fourth ... The fourth chariot at the ready
would bring him to the fifth ... The fifth chariot at the ready would
bring him to the sixth ... The sixth chariot at the ready would bring
him to the seventh, where he'd dismount and mount the seventh chariot.
The seventh chariot at the ready would bring him to the gate of the
royal compound of Sāketa. And when he was at the gate, friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin would ask him: 'Great king, did you come
to Sāketa from Sāvatthī by this chariot at the ready?' If asked this,
how should King Pasenadi rightly reply?"

"The king should reply: 'Well, while staying in Sāvatthī, I had some
urgent business come up in Sāketa. Now, between Sāvatthī and Sāketa
seven chariots were stationed at the ready for me. Then, having departed
Sāvatthī, I mounted the first chariot at the ready by the gate of the
royal compound. The first chariot at the ready brought me to the second,
where I dismounted and mounted the second chariot. ... The second
chariot brought me to the third ... the fourth ... the fifth ... the
sixth ... The sixth chariot at the ready brought me to the seventh,
where I dismounted and mounted the seventh chariot. The seventh chariot
at the ready brought me to the gate of the royal compound of Sāketa.'
That's how King Pasenadi should rightly reply."

"In the same way, reverend, purification of ethics is only for the sake
of purification of mind. Purification of mind is only for the sake of
purification of view. Purification of view is only for the sake of
purification by traversing doubt. Purification by traversing doubt is
only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of what is the
path and what is not the path. Purification of knowledge and vision of
what is the path and what is not the path is only for the sake of
purification of knowledge and vision of the practice. Purification of
knowledge and vision of the practice is only for the sake of
purification of knowledge and vision. Purification of knowledge and
vision is only for the sake of extinguishment by not grasping. The
spiritual life is lived under the Buddha for the sake of extinguishment
by not grasping."

When he said this, Sāriputta said to Puṇṇa, "What is the venerable's
name? And how are you known among your spiritual companions?"

"Reverend, my name is Puṇṇa. And I am known as 'son of Mantāṇī' among my
spiritual companions."

"It's incredible, reverend, it's amazing! Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī
has answered each deep question point by point, as a learned disciple
who rightly understands the teacher's instructions. It is fortunate for
his spiritual companions, so very fortunate, that they get to see
Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī and pay homage to him. Even if they only
got to see him and pay respects to him by carrying him around on their
heads on a roll of cloth, it would still be very fortunate for them! And
it's fortunate for me, so very fortunate, that I get to see the
venerable and pay homage to
him."[584](endnotes.xhtml_note-584){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-584
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Puṇṇa said to Sāriputta, "What is the venerable's
name? And how are you known among your spiritual companions?"

"Reverend, my name is Upatissa. And I am known as Sāriputta among my
spiritual companions."

"Goodness! I had no idea I was consulting with *the* Venerable
Sāriputta, the disciple who is fit to be compared with the Teacher
himself\![585](endnotes.xhtml_note-585){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-585
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I'd known, I would not have said so
much. It's incredible, reverend, it's amazing! Venerable Sāriputta has
asked each deep question point by point, as a learned disciple who
rightly understands the teacher's
instructions.[586](endnotes.xhtml_note-586){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-586
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is fortunate for his spiritual
companions, so very fortunate, that they get to see Venerable Sāriputta
and pay homage to him. Even if they only got to see him and pay respects
to him by carrying him around on their heads on a roll of cloth, it
would still be very fortunate for them! And it's fortunate for me, so
very fortunate, that I get to see the venerable and pay homage to him."

And so these two spiritual giants agreed with each others' fine
words.[587](endnotes.xhtml_note-587){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-587
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn25">

### [MN 25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sowing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nivāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a sower does not sow seed for deer
thinking,[588](endnotes.xhtml_note-588){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-588
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'May the deer, enjoying this seed, be
healthy and in good condition. May they live long and prosper!' A sower
sows seed for deer thinking, 'When these deer encroach on where I sow
the seed, they'll recklessly enjoy eating it. They'll become indulgent,
then they'll become negligent, and then I'll be able to do what I want
with them on account of this seed.'

And indeed, the first herd of deer encroached on where the sower sowed
the seed and recklessly enjoyed eating it. They became indulgent, then
they became negligent, and then the sower was able to do what he wanted
with them on account of that seed. And that's how the first herd of deer
failed to get free from the sower's power.

So then a second herd of deer thought up a plan, 'The first herd of deer
became indulgent ... and failed to get free of the sower's power. Why
don't we avoid eating the seed altogether? Avoiding dangerous food, we
can venture deep into a wilderness region and live there.' And that's
just what they did. But when it came to the last month of summer, the
grass and water ran out. Their bodies became much too thin, and they
lost their strength and energy. So they returned to where the sower had
sown the seed. Encroaching, they recklessly enjoyed eating it ... And
that's how the second herd of deer failed to get free from the sower's
power.

So then a third herd of deer thought up a plan, 'The first ... and
second herds of deer ... failed to get free of the sower's power. Why
don't we set up our lair close by where the sower has sown the seed?
Then we can encroach and enjoy eating without being reckless. We won't
become indulgent, then we won't become negligent, and then the sower
won't be able to do what he wants with us on account of that seed.' And
that's just what they did.

So the sower and his helpers thought, 'Wow, this third herd of deer is
so sneaky and devious, they must be some kind of strange spirits with
magical
abilities\![589](endnotes.xhtml_note-589){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-589
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For they eat the seed we've sown without us
knowing how they come and go. Why don't we surround the seed on all
sides by staking out high nets? Hopefully we might get to see the lair
where they go to hide
out.'[590](endnotes.xhtml_note-590){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-590
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's just what they did. And they saw
the lair where the third herd of deer went to hide out. And that's how
the third herd failed to get free from the sower's power.

So then a fourth herd of deer thought up a plan, 'The first ... second
... and third herds of deer ... failed to get free of the sower's power.
Why don't we set up our lair somewhere the sower and his helpers can't
go? Then we can intrude on where the sower has sown the seed and enjoy
eating it without being reckless. We won't become indulgent, then we
won't become negligent, and then the sower won't be able to do with us
what he wants on account of that seed.' And that's just what they did.

So the sower and his helpers thought, 'Wow, this fourth herd of deer is
so sneaky and devious, they must be some kind of strange spirits with
magical abilities! For they eat the seed we've sown without us knowing
how they come and go. Why don't we surround the seed on all sides by
staking out high nets? Hopefully we might get to see the lair where they
go to hide out.' And that's just what they did. But they couldn't see
the lair where the fourth herd of deer went to hide out. So the sower
and his helpers thought, 'If we disturb this fourth herd of deer,
they'll disturb others, who in turn will disturb even more. Then all of
the deer will escape this seed we've sown. Why don't we just keep an eye
on that fourth herd?' And that's just what they did. And that's how the
fourth herd of deer escaped the sower's power.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is what it means.

'Seed' is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

'Sower' is a term for Māra the Wicked.

'Sower's helpers' is a term for Māra's assembly.

'Deer' is a term for ascetics and brahmins.

Now, the first group of ascetics and brahmins encroached on where the
seed and the worldly pleasures of the flesh were sown by Māra and
recklessly enjoyed eating it. They became indulgent, then they became
negligent, and then Māra was able to do what he wanted with them on
account of that seed and the worldly pleasures of the flesh. And that's
how the first group of ascetics and brahmins failed to get free from
Māra's power. This first group of ascetics and brahmins is just like the
first herd of deer, I say.

So then a second group of ascetics and brahmins thought up a plan, 'The
first group of ascetics and brahmins became indulgent ... and failed to
get free of Māra's power. Why don't we avoid eating the seed and the
worldly pleasures of the flesh altogether? Avoiding dangerous food, we
can venture deep into a wilderness region and live
there.'[591](endnotes.xhtml_note-591){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-591
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's just what they did. They ate
herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from
boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survived on forest
roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

But when it came to the last month of summer, the grass and water ran
out. Their bodies became much too thin, and they lost their strength and
energy. Because of this, they lost their heart's
release,[592](endnotes.xhtml_note-592){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-592
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} so they went back to where Māra had sown
the seed and the worldly pleasures of the flesh. Intruding on that
place, they recklessly enjoyed eating them ... And that's how the second
group of ascetics and brahmins failed to get free from Māra's power.
This second group of ascetics and brahmins is just like the second herd
of deer, I say.

So then a third group of ascetics and brahmins thought up a plan, 'The
first ... and second groups of ascetics and brahmins ... failed to get
free of Māra's power. Why don't we set up our lair close by where Māra
has sown the seed and those worldly pleasures of the flesh? Then we can
encroach on it and enjoy eating without being reckless. We won't become
indulgent, then we won't become negligent, and then Māra won't be able
to do what he wants with us on account of that seed and those worldly
pleasures of the flesh.'

And that's just what they did. Still, they had such views as
these:[593](endnotes.xhtml_note-593){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-593
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The cosmos is eternal' or 'The cosmos is
not
eternal';[594](endnotes.xhtml_note-594){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-594
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The cosmos is finite' or 'The cosmos is
infinite'; 'The soul and the body are the same thing' or 'The soul and
the body are different things'; or that after death, a realized one
still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer
exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. And that's how the
third group of ascetics and brahmins failed to get free from Māra's
power. This third group of ascetics and brahmins is just like the third
herd of deer, I say.

So then a fourth group of ascetics and brahmins thought up a plan, 'The
first ... second ... and third groups of ascetics and brahmins ...
failed to get free of Māra's power. Why don't we set up our lair where
Māra and his assembly can't go? Then we can encroach on where Māra has
sown the seed and those worldly pleasures of the flesh, and enjoy eating
without being reckless. We won't become indulgent, then we won't become
negligent, and then Māra won't be able to do what he wants with us on
account of that seed and those worldly pleasures of the flesh.'

And that's just what they did. And that's how the fourth group of
ascetics and brahmins got free from Māra's power. This fourth group of
ascetics and brahmins is just like the fourth herd of deer, I say.

And where is it that Māra and his assembly can't go? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it
connected.[595](endnotes.xhtml_note-595){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-595
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called a mendicant who has blinded
Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One
cannot see.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant who has blinded
Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. This is called a mendicant who has
blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. This is called a mendicant who has
blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements
come to an
end.[596](endnotes.xhtml_note-596){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-596
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called a mendicant who has blinded
Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One
cannot see. And they've crossed over clinging to the world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn26">

### [MN 26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Quest ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāsarāsisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[597](endnotes.xhtml_note-597){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-597
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then several mendicants went up to Venerable
Ānanda and said to him, "Reverend, it's been a long time since we've
heard a Dhamma talk from the
Buddha.[598](endnotes.xhtml_note-598){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-598
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It would be good if we got to hear a Dhamma
talk from the Buddha."

"Well then, reverends, go to the brahmin Rammaka's
hermitage.[599](endnotes.xhtml_note-599){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-599
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Hopefully you'll get to hear a Dhamma talk
from the Buddha."

"Yes, reverend," they replied.

Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, the Buddha addressed
Ānanda,[600](endnotes.xhtml_note-600){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-600
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the stilt
longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery for the day's
meditation."[601](endnotes.xhtml_note-601){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-601
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the
Eastern Monastery for the day's meditation. In the late afternoon the
Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go
to the eastern gate to bathe."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the eastern gate to bathe. When he had
bathed and emerged from the water he stood in one robe drying his limbs.
Then Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, the hermitage of the brahmin
Rammaka is nearby. It's so delightful, so lovely. Please visit it out of
sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

He went to the brahmin Rammaka's hermitage. Now at that time several
mendicants were sitting together in the hermitage talking about the
teaching.[602](endnotes.xhtml_note-602){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-602
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha stood outside the door waiting
for the talk to end. When he knew the talk had ended he cleared his
throat and knocked on the
door-panel.[603](endnotes.xhtml_note-603){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-603
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The mendicants opened the door for the
Buddha, and he entered the hermitage, where he sat on the seat spread
out and addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting
talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

"Sir, our unfinished discussion on the teaching was about the Buddha
himself when the Buddha arrived."

"Good, mendicants! It's appropriate for gentlemen like you, who have
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, to sit
together and talk about the teaching. When you're sitting together you
should do one of two things: discuss the teachings or keep noble
silence.[604](endnotes.xhtml_note-604){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-604
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, there are these two
quests:[605](endnotes.xhtml_note-605){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-605
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the noble quest and the ignoble
quest.[606](endnotes.xhtml_note-606){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-606
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the ignoble quest? It's when someone who is themselves
liable to be reborn seeks what is also liable to be reborn. Themselves
liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, they
seek what is also liable to these things.

And what should be described as liable to be
reborn?[607](endnotes.xhtml_note-607){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-607
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Partners and children, male and female
bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants and cattle,
and gold and currency are liable to be
reborn.[608](endnotes.xhtml_note-608){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-608
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These attachments are liable to be reborn.
Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves
liable to being reborn, seeks what is also liable to be reborn.

And what should be described as liable to grow old? Partners and
children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and
pigs, elephants and cattle, and gold and currency are liable to grow
old.[609](endnotes.xhtml_note-609){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-609
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These attachments are liable to grow old.
Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves
liable to grow old, seeks what is also liable to grow old.

And what should be described as liable to fall sick? Partners and
children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and
pigs, and elephants and cattle are liable to fall sick. These
attachments are liable to fall sick. Someone who is tied, infatuated,
and attached to such things, themselves liable to falling sick, seeks
what is also liable to fall sick.

And what should be described as liable to die? Partners and children,
male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and
elephants and cattle are liable to die. These attachments are liable to
die. Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things,
themselves liable to die, seeks what is also liable to die.

And what should be described as liable to sorrow? Partners and children,
male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and
elephants and cattle are liable to sorrow. These attachments are liable
to sorrow. Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things,
themselves liable to sorrow, seeks what is also liable to sorrow.

And what should be described as liable to corruption? Partners and
children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and
pigs, elephants and cattle, and gold and currency are liable to
corruption.[610](endnotes.xhtml_note-610){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-610
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These attachments are liable to corruption.
Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves
liable to corruption, seeks what is also liable to corruption. This is
the ignoble quest.

And what is the noble quest? It's when someone who is themselves liable
to be reborn, understanding the drawbacks in being liable to be reborn,
seeks that which is free of rebirth, the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke, extinguishment. Themselves liable to grow old, fall sick, die,
sorrow, and become corrupted, understanding the drawbacks in these
things, they seek that which is free of old age, sickness, death,
sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment.[611](endnotes.xhtml_note-611){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-611
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the noble quest.

Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent
on awakening---I too, being liable to be reborn, sought what is also
liable to be reborn. Myself liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow,
and become corrupted, I sought what is also liable to these things. Then
it occurred to me: 'Why do I, being liable to be reborn, grow old, fall
sick, sorrow, die, and become corrupted, seek things that have the same
nature? Why don't I seek that which is free of rebirth, old age,
sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke, extinguishment?'

Some time later, while still with pristine black hair, blessed with
youth, in the prime of life---though my mother and father wished
otherwise, weeping with tearful faces---I shaved off my hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[612](endnotes.xhtml_note-612){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-612
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Once I had gone forth I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking
the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said
to him,[613](endnotes.xhtml_note-613){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-613
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend Kālāma, I wish to lead the
spiritual life in this teaching and
training.'[614](endnotes.xhtml_note-614){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-614
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Āḷāra Kālāma replied, 'Stay,
venerable.[615](endnotes.xhtml_note-615){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-615
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This teaching is such that a sensible
person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and
live having achieved
it.'[616](endnotes.xhtml_note-616){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-616
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I quickly memorized that
teaching.[617](endnotes.xhtml_note-617){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-617
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As far as lip-recital and verbal repetition
went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine. I claimed
to know and see, and so did
others.[618](endnotes.xhtml_note-618){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-618
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Āḷāra
Kālāma declares: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live
having achieved
it."[619](endnotes.xhtml_note-619){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-619
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Surely he meditates knowing and seeing this
teaching.'

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, to what
extent do you say you've realized this teaching with your own insight?'
When I said this, he declared the dimension of
nothingness.[620](endnotes.xhtml_note-620){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-620
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Āḷāra Kālāma who has
faith,[621](endnotes.xhtml_note-621){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-621
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom;
I too have these things. Why don't I make an effort to realize the same
teaching that Āḷāra Kālāma says he has realized with his own insight?' I
quickly realized that teaching with my own insight, and lived having
achieved
it.[622](endnotes.xhtml_note-622){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-622
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, is it up
to this point that you realized this teaching with your own insight, and
declare having achieved
it?'[623](endnotes.xhtml_note-623){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-623
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'I have, reverend.'

'I too, reverend, have realized this teaching with my own insight up to
this point, and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
I've realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, I've realized with my own insight, and declare having
achieved it. So the teaching that I know, you know, and the teaching
that you know, I
know.[624](endnotes.xhtml_note-624){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-624
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I am like you and you are like me. Come
now, reverend! We should both lead this community
together.'[625](endnotes.xhtml_note-625){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-625
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And that is how my tutor Āḷāra Kālāma placed me, his student, on the
same position as him, and honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of
nothingness.'[626](endnotes.xhtml_note-626){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-626
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Realizing that this teaching was
inadequate, I left disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to
him,[627](endnotes.xhtml_note-627){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-627
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend, I wish to lead the spiritual
life in this teaching and
training.'[628](endnotes.xhtml_note-628){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-628
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Uddaka replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a sensible
person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and
live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Rāma
declared: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having
achieved
it."[629](endnotes.xhtml_note-629){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-629
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Surely he meditated knowing and seeing this
teaching.'

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, to what
extent did Rāma say he'd realized this teaching with his own insight?'

When I said this, Uddaka son of Rāma declared the dimension of neither
perception nor
non-perception.[630](endnotes.xhtml_note-630){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-630
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Rāma who had faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why don't I
make an effort to realize the same teaching that Rāma said he had
realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that teaching with my
own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, had Rāma
realized this teaching with his own insight up to this point, and
declared having achieved it?'

'He had, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having
achieved it. So the teaching that Rāma directly knew, you know, and the
teaching you know, Rāma directly knew. Rāma was like you and you are
like Rāma. Come now, reverend! You should lead this community.'

And that is how my spiritual companion Uddaka son of Rāma placed me in
the position of a tutor and honored me with lofty
praise.[631](endnotes.xhtml_note-631){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-631
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left
disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. Traveling stage by stage in the Magadhan lands, I arrived
at Senānigama in
Uruvelā.[632](endnotes.xhtml_note-632){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-632
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There I saw a delightful park, a lovely
grove with a flowing river that was clean and charming, with smooth
banks. And nearby was a village for
alms.[633](endnotes.xhtml_note-633){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-633
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'This park is truly delightful, a lovely grove
with a flowing river that's clean and charming, with smooth banks. And
nearby there's a village to go for alms. This is good enough for
striving for a gentleman wanting to
strive.'[634](endnotes.xhtml_note-634){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-634
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I sat down right there, thinking, 'This
is good enough for striving.'

And so, being myself liable to be reborn, understanding the drawbacks in
being liable to be reborn, I sought that which is free of rebirth, the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment---and I found it. Being
myself liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted,
understanding the drawbacks in these things, I sought that which is free
of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment---and I found
it.[635](endnotes.xhtml_note-635){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-635
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there are no more future
lives.'[636](endnotes.xhtml_note-636){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-636
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'This principle I have discovered is deep, hard
to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of
logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute. But people like clinging,
they love it and enjoy it. It's hard for them to see this topic; that
is, specific conditionality, dependent
origination.[637](endnotes.xhtml_note-637){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-637
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's also hard for them to see this topic;
that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment. And if I were to teach the Dhamma, others might not
understand me, which would be wearying and troublesome for
me.'[638](endnotes.xhtml_note-638){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-638
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired, nor
learned before in the past, occurred to me:

> 'I've struggled hard to realize this,\
> enough with trying to explain it!\
> Those mired in greed and hate\
> can't really understand this teaching.
>
> It goes against the stream, subtle,\
> deep, obscure, and very fine.\
> Those besotted by greed cannot see,\
> for they're shrouded in a mass of darkness.'

So, as I reflected like this, my mind inclined to remaining passive, not
to teaching the Dhamma.

Then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing my train of thought,
thought,[639](endnotes.xhtml_note-639){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-639
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Alas! The world will be lost, the world
will perish! For the mind of the Realized One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha, inclines to remaining passive, not to teaching
the
Dhamma.'[640](endnotes.xhtml_note-640){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-640
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
he vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared in front of me. He
arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward me,
and said, 'Sir, let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma! Let the Holy One
teach the Dhamma! There are beings with little dust in their eyes.
They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will
be those who understand the
teaching!'[641](endnotes.xhtml_note-641){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-641
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That's what Brahmā Sahampati said. Then he went on to say:

> 'Among the Magadhans there appeared in the past\
> an impure teaching thought up by those still
> stained.[642](endnotes.xhtml_note-642){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-642
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Fling open the door to freedom from
> death\![643](endnotes.xhtml_note-643){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-643
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Let them hear the teaching `<j>`{=html}the immaculate one discovered.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Standing high on a rocky mountain,\
> you can see the people all around.\
> In just the same way, All-seer, so intelligent,\
> having ascended the Temple of Truth,\
> rid of sorrow, look upon the people\
> swamped with sorrow, `<j>`{=html}oppressed by rebirth and old age.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Rise, hero! Victor in battle, leader of the
> caravan,[644](endnotes.xhtml_note-644){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-644
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> wander the world free of debt.\
> Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!\
> There will be those who understand!'

Then, understanding Brahmā's invitation, I surveyed the world with the
eye of a Buddha, because of my compassion for sentient beings. And I saw
sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust
in their eyes; with keen faculties and with weak faculties, with good
qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And
some of them lived seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next
world, while others did
not.[645](endnotes.xhtml_note-645){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-645
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or
pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without
rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in
the water reaching the water's surface. And some of them sprout and grow
in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water
clinging to them. In the same way, I saw sentient beings with little
dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes.

Then I replied in verse to Brahmā Sahampati:

> 'Flung open are the doors to freedom from death!\
> Let those with ears to hear commit to
> faith.[646](endnotes.xhtml_note-646){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-646
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Thinking it would be troublesome, Brahmā, `<j>`{=html}I did not teach
> `</j>`{=html}\
> the sophisticated, sublime Dhamma among humans.'

Then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing that his request for me to teach the
Dhamma had been granted, bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me
on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then I thought, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will quickly
understand this teaching?'

Then it occurred to me, 'That Āḷāra Kālāma is astute, competent, clever,
and has long had little dust in his eyes. Why don't I teach him first of
all? He'll quickly understand the teaching.'

But a deity came to me and said, 'Sir, Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven
days ago.'

And knowledge and vision arose in me, 'Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven
days ago.'

I thought, 'This is a great loss for Āḷāra Kālāma. If he had heard the
teaching, he would have understood it quickly.'

Then I thought, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will quickly
understand this teaching?'

Then it occurred to me, 'That Uddaka son of Rāma is astute, competent,
clever, and has long had little dust in his eyes. Why don't I teach him
first of all? He'll quickly understand the teaching.'

But a deity came to me and said, 'Sir, Uddaka son of Rāma passed away
just last night.'

And knowledge and vision arose in me, 'Uddaka son of Rāma passed away
just last night.'

I thought, 'This is a great loss for Uddaka. If he had heard the
teaching, he would have understood it
quickly.'[647](endnotes.xhtml_note-647){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-647
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then I thought, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will quickly
understand this teaching?'

Then it occurred to me, 'The group of five mendicants were very helpful
to me. They looked after me during my time of resolute
striving.[648](endnotes.xhtml_note-648){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-648
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I teach them first of all?'

Then I thought, 'Where are the group of five mendicants staying these
days?' With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman I saw that the
group of five mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. So, when I had stayed in Uruvelā as long as I pleased, I set
out for
Varanasi.[649](endnotes.xhtml_note-649){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-649
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

While I was traveling along the road between Gayā and Bodhgaya, the
Ājīvaka ascetic Upaka saw
me[650](endnotes.xhtml_note-650){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-650
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and said, 'Reverend, your faculties are so
very clear, and your complexion is pure and
bright.[651](endnotes.xhtml_note-651){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-651
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In whose name have you gone forth,
reverend? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you believe in?'

I replied to Upaka in verse:

> 'I am the champion, the knower of all,\
> unsullied in the midst of all things.\
> I've given up all, freed through the ending of craving.\
> Since I know for myself, whose follower should I be?
>
> I have no tutor.\
> There is no-one like me.\
> In the world with its gods,\
> I have no rival.
>
> For in this world, I am the perfected one;\
> I am the supreme Teacher.\
> I alone am fully awakened,\
> cooled, quenched.
>
> I am going to the city of Kāsi\
> to roll forth the Wheel of Dhamma.\
> In this world that is so blind,\
> I'll beat the drum of freedom from
> death!'[652](endnotes.xhtml_note-652){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-652
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'According to what you claim, reverend, you ought to be the Infinite
Victor.'[653](endnotes.xhtml_note-653){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-653
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'The victors are those who, like
> me,[654](endnotes.xhtml_note-654){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-654
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> have reached the ending of defilements.\
> I have conquered bad qualities, Upaka---\
> that's why I'm a victor.'

When I had spoken, Upaka said: 'If you say so, reverend.' Shaking his
head, he took a wrong turn and left.

Traveling stage by stage, I arrived at Varanasi, and went to see the
group of five mendicants in the deer park at Isipatana. The group of
five mendicants saw me coming off in the distance and stopped each
other,
saying,[655](endnotes.xhtml_note-655){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-655
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Here comes the ascetic Gotama. He's so
indulgent; he strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence. We
shouldn't bow to him or rise for him or receive his bowl and robe. But
we can set out a seat; he can sit if he likes.' Yet as I drew closer,
the group of five mendicants were unable to stop themselves as they had
agreed. Some came out to greet me and receive my bowl and robe, some
spread out a seat, while others set out water for washing my feet. But
they still addressed me by name and as
'reverend'.[656](endnotes.xhtml_note-656){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-656
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So I said to them, 'Mendicants, don't address me by name and as
"reverend". The Realized One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha.
Listen up, mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall
instruct you, I will teach you the Dhamma. By practicing as instructed
you will soon realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very
life. You will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

But they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama, even by that conduct, that
practice, that grueling work you did not achieve any superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. How could
you have achieved such a state now that you've become indulgent, strayed
from the struggle and returned to
indulgence?'[657](endnotes.xhtml_note-657){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-657
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So I said to them, 'The Realized One has not become indulgent, strayed
from the struggle and returned to indulgence. The Realized One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. Listen up, mendicants: I have
achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I will teach you the
Dhamma. By practicing as instructed you will soon realize the supreme
end of the spiritual path in this very life.'

But for a second time they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama ... you've
returned to indulgence.'

So for a second time I said to them, 'The Realized One has not become
indulgent ...'

But for a third time they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama, even by that
conduct, that practice, that grueling work you did not achieve any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
How could you have achieved such a state now that you've become
indulgent, strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence?'

So I said to them, 'Mendicants, have you ever known me to speak like
this before?'

'No sir, we have
not.'[658](endnotes.xhtml_note-658){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-658
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'The Realized One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. Listen up,
mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I
will teach you the Dhamma. By practicing as instructed you will soon
realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. You
will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

I was able to persuade the group of five
mendicants.[659](endnotes.xhtml_note-659){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-659
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then sometimes I advised two mendicants,
while the other three went for alms. Then those three would feed all six
of us with what they brought back. Sometimes I advised three mendicants,
while the other two went for alms. Then those two would feed all six of
us with what they brought back.

As the group of five mendicants were being advised and instructed by me
like this, being themselves liable to be reborn, understanding the
drawbacks in being liable to be reborn, they sought that which is free
of rebirth, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment---and
they found it. Being themselves liable to grow old, fall sick, die,
sorrow, and become corrupted, understanding the drawbacks in these
things, they sought that which is free of old age, sickness, death,
sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment---and they found it. Knowledge and vision arose in them:
'Our freedom is unshakable; this is our last rebirth; now there are no
more future
lives.'[660](endnotes.xhtml_note-660){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-660
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual
stimulation.[661](endnotes.xhtml_note-661){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-661
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five? Sights known by the eye, which
are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.
Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by
the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of
sensual stimulation.

There are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual
stimulation tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not
understanding the escape. You should understand that
they[662](endnotes.xhtml_note-662){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-662
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} have met with calamity and disaster, and
the Wicked One can do with them what he wants.

Suppose a deer in the wilderness was lying caught on a pile of
snares.[663](endnotes.xhtml_note-663){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-663
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You'd know that it has met with calamity
and disaster, and the hunter can do with them what he wants. And when
the hunter comes, it cannot flee where it wants.

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five
kinds of sensual stimulation tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the
drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. You should understand that
they have met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One can do with
them what he wants.

There are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual
stimulation without being tied, infatuated, or attached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. You should understand that they
haven't met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do
what he wants with them.

Suppose a deer in the wilderness was lying on a pile of snares without
being caught. You'd know that it hasn't met with calamity and disaster,
and the hunter cannot do what he wants with them. And when the hunter
comes, it can flee where it wants.

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five
kinds of sensual stimulation without being tied, infatuated, or
attached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. You should
understand that they haven't met with calamity and disaster, and the
Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.

Suppose there was a wild deer wandering in the forest that walked,
stood, sat, and laid down in confidence. Why is that? Because it's out
of the hunter's range.

In the same way, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is called a mendicant
who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where
the Wicked One cannot see.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is
called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant who has blinded
Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. This is called a mendicant who has
blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of
nothingness.[664](endnotes.xhtml_note-664){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-664
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called a mendicant who has blinded
Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements
come to an end. This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out
his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see.
They've crossed over clinging to the world. And they walk, stand, sit,
and lie down in confidence. Why is that? Because they're out of the
Wicked One's range."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn27">

### [MN 27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Simile of the Elephant's Footprint ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷahatthipadopamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[665](endnotes.xhtml_note-665){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-665
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the brahmin Jānussoṇi drove out from Sāvatthī in the
middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn by
mares.[666](endnotes.xhtml_note-666){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-666
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw the wanderer Pilotika coming off in
the
distance,[667](endnotes.xhtml_note-667){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-667
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and said to him, "So, Mister Vacchāyana,
where are you coming from in the middle of the day?"

"Just now, good sir, I've come from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"What do you think of the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom? Do you
think he's astute?"

"My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of
wisdom?[668](endnotes.xhtml_note-668){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-668
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You'd really have to be on the same level
to judge his lucidity of wisdom."

"Mister Vacchāyana praises the ascetic Gotama with lofty praise indeed."

"Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? He is praised by the praised as
the first among gods and humans."

"But for what reason are you so devoted to the ascetic Gotama?"

"Suppose that a skilled bull elephant tracker were to enter a bull
elephant
wood.[669](endnotes.xhtml_note-669){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-669
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There he'd see a large elephant's
footprint, long and broad. He would come to the
conclusion,[670](endnotes.xhtml_note-670){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-670
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This must be a big bull elephant.'

In the same way, because I saw four footprints of the ascetic Gotama I
came to the conclusion, 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

What four? Firstly, I see some clever aristocrats who are subtle,
accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd think
they live to demolish convictions with their intellect. They hear, 'So,
gentlemen, that ascetic Gotama will come down to such and such village
or town.' They formulate a question, thinking, 'We'll approach the
ascetic Gotama and ask him this question. If he answers like this, we'll
refute him like that; and if he answers like that, we'll refute him like
this.'

When they hear that he has come down they approach him. The ascetic
Gotama educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires them with a Dhamma
talk. They don't even get around to asking their question to the ascetic
Gotama, so how could they refute his answer? Invariably, they become his
disciples. When I saw this first footprint of the ascetic Gotama, I came
to the conclusion, 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, I see some clever brahmins ... some clever householders ...
they become his disciples.

Furthermore, I see some clever ascetics who are subtle, accomplished in
the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. ... They don't even get around
to asking their question to the ascetic Gotama, so how could they refute
his answer? Invariably, they ask the ascetic Gotama for the chance to go
forth. And he gives them the going-forth. Soon after going forth, living
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, they realize the supreme end of
the spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with
their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the
lay life to homelessness.

They say, 'We were almost lost! We almost perished! For we used to claim
that we were ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones, but we were none of
these things. But now we really are ascetics, brahmins, and perfected
ones!' When I saw this fourth footprint of the ascetic Gotama, I came to
the conclusion, 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

It's because I saw these four footprints of the ascetic Gotama that I
came to the conclusion, 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'"

When he had spoken, Jānussoṇi got down from his chariot, arranged his
robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and
expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Hopefully, some time or other I'll get to meet Mister Gotama, and we can
have a discussion."

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all he had
discussed with the wanderer Pilotika.

When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him, "Brahmin, the simile of the
elephant's footprint is not yet completed in detail. As to how it is
completed in detail, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose a bull elephant tracker were to enter a bull elephant wood.
There they'd see a large elephant's footprint, long and broad. A skilled
bull elephant tracker does not yet come to the conclusion, 'This must be
a big bull elephant.' Why not? Because in an elephant wood there are
dwarf cow elephants with big footprints, and this footprint might be one
of
theirs.[671](endnotes.xhtml_note-671){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-671
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They keep following the track until they see a big footprint, long and
broad, and traces high up. A skilled bull elephant tracker does not yet
come to the conclusion, 'This must be a big bull elephant.' Why not?
Because in an elephant wood there are tall lofty cow elephants with big
footprints, and this footprint might be one of
theirs.[672](endnotes.xhtml_note-672){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-672
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They keep following the track until they see a big footprint, long and
broad, and traces and tusk-marks high up. A skilled bull elephant
tracker does not yet come to the conclusion, 'This must be a big bull
elephant.' Why not? Because in an elephant wood there are tall matriarch
cow elephants with big footprints, and this footprint might be one of
theirs.[673](endnotes.xhtml_note-673){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-673
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They keep following the track until they see a big footprint, long and
broad, and traces, tusk-marks, and broken branches high up. And they see
that bull elephant walking, standing, sitting, or lying down at the root
of a tree or in the open. Then they'd come to the conclusion, 'This is
that big bull elephant.'

In the same way, brahmin, a Realized One arises in the world, perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened,
blessed.[674](endnotes.xhtml_note-674){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-674
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He realizes with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely complete and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One, and
reflect, 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living
beings.[675](endnotes.xhtml_note-675){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-675
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving.[676](endnotes.xhtml_note-676){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-676
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of
sex.[677](endnotes.xhtml_note-677){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-677
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and trustworthy, and don't trick the world with their
words.[678](endnotes.xhtml_note-678){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-678
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony.[679](endnotes.xhtml_note-679){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-679
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable
to the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial.[680](endnotes.xhtml_note-680){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-680
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They avoid injuring plants and
seeds.[681](endnotes.xhtml_note-681){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-681
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They eat in one part of the day, abstaining
from eating at night and at the wrong
time.[682](endnotes.xhtml_note-682){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-682
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They avoid seeing shows of dancing,
singing, and
music.[683](endnotes.xhtml_note-683){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-683
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They avoid beautifying and adorning
themselves with garlands, fragrance, and
makeup.[684](endnotes.xhtml_note-684){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-684
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They avoid high and luxurious
beds.[685](endnotes.xhtml_note-685){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-685
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They avoid receiving gold and
currency,[686](endnotes.xhtml_note-686){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-686
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} raw
grains,[687](endnotes.xhtml_note-687){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-687
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} raw meat, women and girls, male and female
bondservants,[688](endnotes.xhtml_note-688){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-688
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} goats and
sheep,[689](endnotes.xhtml_note-689){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-689
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses,
and mares, and fields and
land.[690](endnotes.xhtml_note-690){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-690
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They avoid running errands and
messages;[691](endnotes.xhtml_note-691){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-691
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} buying and
selling;[692](endnotes.xhtml_note-692){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-692
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} falsifying weights, metals, or measures;
bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction,
banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things.[693](endnotes.xhtml_note-693){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-693
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're like a bird: wherever it flies,
wings are its only burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with
robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly.
Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. When they have
this entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless
happiness inside
themselves.[694](endnotes.xhtml_note-694){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-694
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its
restraint.[695](endnotes.xhtml_note-695){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-695
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they have this noble
sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside
themselves.[696](endnotes.xhtml_note-696){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-696
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[697](endnotes.xhtml_note-697){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-697
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw.[698](endnotes.xhtml_note-698){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-698
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their
presence.[699](endnotes.xhtml_note-699){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-699
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up covetousness for the world, they
meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of
covetousness.[700](endnotes.xhtml_note-700){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-700
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up ill will and malevolence, they
meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living
beings, cleansing the mind of ill
will.[701](endnotes.xhtml_note-701){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-701
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they
meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light,
mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and
drowsiness.[702](endnotes.xhtml_note-702){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-702
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and
remorse.[703](endnotes.xhtml_note-703){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-703
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone
beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind
of
doubt.[704](endnotes.xhtml_note-704){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-704
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom.[705](endnotes.xhtml_note-705){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-705
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in
the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. This, brahmin, is that
which is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' and also 'a trace of
the Realized One' and also 'a mark of the Realized
One'.[706](endnotes.xhtml_note-706){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-706
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But a noble disciple does not yet come to
the
conclusion,[707](endnotes.xhtml_note-707){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-707
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened
Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This too
is what is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' ...

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This too
is what is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' ...

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This too
is what is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' ...

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. ... They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. This too is what is called 'a footprint of the
Realized One' ...

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the
human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds. This too is what is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' ...

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements.' This, brahmin, is
what is called 'a footprint of the Realized One' and also 'a trace of
the Realized One' and also 'a mark of the Realized One'. At this point a
noble disciple has not yet come to a conclusion, but they are coming to
the
conclusion,[708](endnotes.xhtml_note-708){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-708
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened
Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This, brahmin, is what is called 'a footprint of the
Realized One' and also 'a trace of the Realized One' and also 'a mark of
the Realized One'. At this point a noble disciple has come to the
conclusion,[709](endnotes.xhtml_note-709){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-709
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened
Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'
And it is at this point that the simile of the elephant's footprint has
been completed in detail."

When he had spoken, the brahmin Jānussoṇi said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn28">

### [MN 28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Simile of the Elephant's Footprint ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāhatthipadopamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There Sāriputta
addressed the
mendicants,[710](endnotes.xhtml_note-710){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-710
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are included in the four
noble
truths.[711](endnotes.xhtml_note-711){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-711
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? The noble truths of suffering,
the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice
that leads to the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering.
In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. And what are the
five grasping aggregates? They are as follows: the grasping aggregates
of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

And what is the grasping aggregate of form? The four principal states,
and form derived from the four principal
states.[712](endnotes.xhtml_note-712){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-712
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what are the four principal
states?[713](endnotes.xhtml_note-713){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-713
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The elements of earth, water, fire, and
air.[714](endnotes.xhtml_note-714){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-714
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the earth element? The earth element may be interior or
exterior.[715](endnotes.xhtml_note-715){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-715
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is the interior earth element?
Anything internal, pertaining to an individual, that's hard, solid, and
appropriated. This
includes:[716](endnotes.xhtml_note-716){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-716
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin,
flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm,
spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces; or
anything else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's hard, solid,
and
appropriated.[717](endnotes.xhtml_note-717){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-717
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the interior earth element.
The interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the
earth
element.[718](endnotes.xhtml_note-718){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-718
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my
self.'[719](endnotes.xhtml_note-719){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-719
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the earth element, detaching
the mind from the earth element.

There comes a time when the exterior water element flares
up.[720](endnotes.xhtml_note-720){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-720
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that time the exterior earth element
vanishes. So for all its great age, the earth element will be revealed
as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and
perish.[721](endnotes.xhtml_note-721){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-721
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What then of this ephemeral body
appropriated by craving? Rather than 'I' or 'mine' or 'I am', they
consider it to be none of these
things.[722](endnotes.xhtml_note-722){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-722
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

If others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble that mendicant, they
understand:[723](endnotes.xhtml_note-723){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-723
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This painful feeling born of ear contact
has arisen in
me.[724](endnotes.xhtml_note-724){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-724
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's dependent, not independent.
Dependent on what? Dependent on contact.' They see that contact,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
impermanent.[725](endnotes.xhtml_note-725){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-725
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Based on that element alone, their mind
leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes
decided.[726](endnotes.xhtml_note-726){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-726
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Others might treat that mendicant with disliking, loathing, and
detestation, striking them with fists, stones, sticks, and swords. They
understand: 'This body is such that fists, stones, sticks, and swords
strike it. But the Buddha has said in the Advice on the Simile of the
Saw:[727](endnotes.xhtml_note-727){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-727
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Even if low-down bandits were to sever you limb from limb with a
two-handed saw, anyone who had a malevolent thought on that account
would not be following my instructions." My energy shall be roused up
and unflagging, my mindfulness established and lucid, my body tranquil
and undisturbed, and my mind immersed in samādhi. Gladly now, let fists,
stones, sticks, and swords strike this body! For this is how the
instructions of the Buddhas are followed.'

While recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way,
equanimity based on the skillful may not become stabilized in
them.[728](endnotes.xhtml_note-728){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-728
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In that case they stir up a sense of
urgency: 'It's my loss, my misfortune, that while recollecting the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on
the skillful does not become stabilized in me.' They're like a
daughter-in-law who stirs up a sense of urgency when they see their
father-in-law.[729](endnotes.xhtml_note-729){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-729
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if, while recollecting the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful
does become stabilized in them, they're happy with that. At this point,
much has been done by that
mendicant.[730](endnotes.xhtml_note-730){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-730
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is the water element? The water element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior water element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This includes: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease,
saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine; or anything else internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This is called the interior water element. The interior water element
and the exterior water element are just the water element. This should
be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the water element, detaching
the mind from the water element.

There comes a time when the exterior water element flares up. It sweeps
away villages, towns, cities, countries, and
regions.[731](endnotes.xhtml_note-731){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-731
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There comes a time when the water in the
ocean sinks down a hundred leagues, or two, three, four, five, six, up
to seven hundred leagues. There comes a time when the water in the ocean
stands just seven palm trees deep, or six, five, four, three, two, or
even just one palm tree deep. There comes a time when the water in the
ocean stands just seven fathoms deep, or six, five, four, three, two, or
even just one fathom deep. There comes a time when the water in the
ocean stands just half a fathom deep, or waist deep, or knee deep, or
even just ankle deep. There comes a time when there's not even enough
water left in the great ocean to wet the tip of the toe. So for all its
great age, the water element will be revealed as impermanent, liable to
end, vanish, and perish. What then of this ephemeral body appropriated
by craving? Rather than 'I' or 'mine' or 'I am', they consider it to be
none of these things. ... If, while recollecting the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful
does become stabilized in them, they're happy with that. At this point,
much has been done by that mendicant.

And what is the fire element? The fire element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior fire element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual that's fire, fiery, and appropriated. This
includes: that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up
when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink; or anything
else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's fire, fiery, and
appropriated. This is called the interior fire element. The interior
fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element.
This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with
right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire element,
detaching the mind from the fire element.

There comes a time when the exterior fire element flares up. It burns up
villages, towns, cities, countries, and regions until it reaches a green
field, a roadside, a cliff's edge, a body of water, or cleared parkland,
where it's extinguished due to not being fed. There comes a time when
they go looking for a fire, taking just a chicken feather or a scrap of
sinew as kindling. So for all its great age, the fire element will be
revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. What then of
this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than 'I' or 'mine'
or 'I am', they consider it to be none of these things. ...

If, while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this
way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them,
they're happy with that. At this point, much has been done by that
mendicant.

And what is the air element? The air element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior air element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy, and appropriated. This
includes: winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels,
winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths; or
anything else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy,
and
appropriated.[732](endnotes.xhtml_note-732){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-732
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the interior air element.
The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air
element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like this:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly
see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air
element, detaching the mind from the air element.

There comes a time when the exterior air element flares up. It sweeps
away villages, towns, cities, countries, and regions. There comes a
time, in the last month of summer, when they look for wind by using a
palm-leaf or fan, and even the grasses in the drip-fringe of a thatch
roof don't stir. So for all its great age, the air element will be
revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. What then of
this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than 'I' or 'mine'
or 'I am', they consider it to be none of these things.

If others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble that mendicant, they
understand: 'This painful feeling born of ear contact has arisen in me.
That's dependent, not independent. Dependent on what? Dependent on
contact.' They see that contact, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are impermanent. Based on that element alone, their mind
leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.

Others might treat that mendicant with disliking, loathing, and
detestation, striking them with fists, stones, sticks, and swords. They
understand: 'This body is such that fists, stones, sticks, and swords
strike it. But the Buddha has said in the Advice on the Simile of the
Saw: "Even if low-down bandits were to sever you limb from limb with a
two-handed saw, anyone who had a thought of hate on that account would
not be following my instructions." My energy shall be roused up and
unflagging, my mindfulness established and lucid, my body tranquil and
undisturbed, and my mind immersed in samādhi. Gladly now, let fists,
stones, sticks, and swords strike this body! For this is how the
instructions of the Buddhas are followed.'

While recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way,
equanimity based on the skillful may not become stabilized in them. In
that case they stir up a sense of urgency: 'It's my loss, my misfortune,
that while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this
way, equanimity based on the skillful does not become stabilized in me.'
They're like a daughter-in-law who stirs up a sense of urgency when they
see their father-in-law. But if, while recollecting the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful
does become stabilized in them, they're happy with that. At this point,
much has been done by that mendicant.

When a space is enclosed by sticks, creepers, grass, and mud it becomes
known as a
'building'.[733](endnotes.xhtml_note-733){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-733
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, when a space is enclosed
by bones, sinews, flesh, and skin it becomes known as a 'form'.

Reverends, though the eye is intact internally, so long as exterior
sights don't come into range and there's no corresponding engagement,
there's no manifestation of the corresponding type of
consciousness.[734](endnotes.xhtml_note-734){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-734
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Though the eye is intact internally and
exterior sights come into range, so long as there's no corresponding
engagement, there's no manifestation of the corresponding type of
consciousness. But when the eye is intact internally and exterior sights
come into range and there is corresponding engagement, there is the
manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness.

The form produced in this way is included in the grasping aggregate of
form. The feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness produced in
this way are each included in the corresponding grasping
aggregate.[735](endnotes.xhtml_note-735){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-735
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They understand: 'So this is how there comes to be inclusion, gathering
together, and joining together into these five grasping aggregates. But
the Buddha has
said:[736](endnotes.xhtml_note-736){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-736
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "One who sees dependent origination sees
the
teaching.[737](endnotes.xhtml_note-737){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-737
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} One who sees the teaching sees dependent
origination." And these five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently
originated. The desire, clinging, attraction, and attachment for these
five grasping aggregates is the origin of
suffering.[738](endnotes.xhtml_note-738){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-738
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Giving up and getting rid of desire and
greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of suffering.'
At this point, much has been done by that mendicant.

Though the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is intact
internally, so long as exterior ideas don't come into range and there's
no corresponding engagement, there's no manifestation of the
corresponding type of
consciousness.[739](endnotes.xhtml_note-739){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-739
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Though the mind is intact internally and exterior ideas come into range,
so long as there's no corresponding engagement, there's no manifestation
of the corresponding type of consciousness. But when the mind is intact
internally and exterior ideas come into range and there is corresponding
engagement, there is the manifestation of the corresponding type of
consciousness.

The form produced in this way is included in the grasping aggregate of
form. The feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness produced in
this way are each included in the corresponding grasping aggregate. They
understand: 'So this is how there comes to be inclusion, gathering
together, and joining together into these five grasping aggregates.

But the Buddha has also said: "One who sees dependent origination sees
the teaching. One who sees the teaching sees dependent origination." And
these five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently originated. The
desire, clinging, attraction, and attachment for these five grasping
aggregates is the origin of suffering. Giving up and getting rid of
desire and greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of
suffering.' At this point, much has been done by that mendicant."

That's what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved
what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="mn29">

### [MN 29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Simile of the Heartwood ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsāropamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain, not long after Devadatta had
left.[740](endnotes.xhtml_note-740){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-740
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha spoke to the mendicants
about Devadatta:

"Mendicants, take the case of a gentleman who has gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking, 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth
they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. They're happy with
that, and they've got all they wished for. And they glorify themselves
and put others down because of that: 'I'm the one with possessions,
honor, and popularity. These other mendicants are obscure and
insignificant.' And so they become indulgent and fall into negligence on
account of those possessions, honor, and popularity. And being negligent
they live in
suffering.[741](endnotes.xhtml_note-741){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-741
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, softwood, bark, and shoots,
he'd cut off the branches and leaves and depart imagining they were
heartwood.[742](endnotes.xhtml_note-742){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-742
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If a person with clear eyes saw him they'd
say, 'This gentleman doesn't know what heartwood, softwood, bark,
shoots, or branches and leaves are. That's why he passed them over, cut
off the branches and leaves, and departed imagining they were heartwood.
Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won't succeed.' ...

This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the branches and leaves of
the spiritual life and stopped short with that.

Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness ... When they've gone forth they generate possessions,
honor, and popularity. They're not happy with that, and haven't got all
they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that. Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence
on account of those possessions, honor, and popularity. Being diligent,
they achieve accomplishment in ethics. They're happy with that, and
they've got all they wished for. And they glorify themselves and put
others down on account of that: 'I'm the one who is ethical, of good
character. These other mendicants are unethical, of bad character.' And
so they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding their
accomplishment in ethics. And being negligent they live in suffering.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, softwood, and bark, he'd cut
off the shoots and depart imagining they were heartwood. If a person
with clear eyes saw him they'd say, 'This gentleman doesn't know what
heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. That's
why he passed them over, cut off the shoots, and departed imagining they
were heartwood. Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won't
succeed.' ...

This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the shoots of the spiritual
life and stopped short with that.

Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness ... When they've gone forth they generate possessions,
honor, and popularity. ... Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment
in immersion. They're happy with that, and they've got all they wished
for. And they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that:
'I'm the one with immersion and unified mind. These other mendicants
lack immersion, they have straying minds.' And so they become indulgent
and fall into negligence regarding that accomplishment in immersion. And
being negligent they live in suffering.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood and softwood, he'd cut off
the bark and depart imagining it was heartwood. If a person with clear
eyes saw him they'd say: 'This gentleman doesn't know what heartwood,
softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. That's why he passed
them over, cut off the bark, and departed imagining it was heartwood.
Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won't succeed.' ...

This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the bark of the spiritual
life and stopped short with that.

Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness ... When they've gone forth they generate possessions,
honor, and popularity. ... Being diligent, they achieve knowledge and
vision.[743](endnotes.xhtml_note-743){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-743
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're happy with that, and they've got
all they wished for. And they glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that, 'I'm the one who meditates knowing and seeing. These
other mendicants meditate without knowing and seeing.' And so they
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that knowledge and
vision. And being negligent they live in suffering.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, he'd cut out the softwood
and depart imagining it was heartwood. If a person with clear eyes saw
him they'd say, 'This gentleman doesn't know what heartwood, softwood,
bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. That's why he passed them
over, cut out the softwood, and departed imagining it was heartwood.
Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won't succeed.' ...

This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the softwood of the spiritual
life and stopped short with that.

Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness, thinking, 'I'm swamped by rebirth, old age, and death;
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this
entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth they generate
possessions, honor, and popularity. They're not happy with that, and
haven't got all they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put
others down on account of that. Nor do they become indulgent and fall
into negligence on account of those possessions, honor, and popularity.
Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in ethics. They're happy
with that, but they haven't got all they wished for. They don't glorify
themselves and put others down on account of that. Nor do they become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that accomplishment in
ethics. Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in immersion.
They're happy with that, but they haven't got all they wished for. They
don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. Nor do
they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that
accomplishment in immersion. Being diligent, they achieve knowledge and
vision. They're happy with that, but they haven't got all they wished
for. They don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of
that. Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding
that knowledge and vision. Being diligent, they achieve irreversible
freedom.[744](endnotes.xhtml_note-744){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-744
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And it's impossible for that mendicant to
fall away from that irreversible freedom.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. He'd cut out just the heartwood and depart knowing it was
heartwood. If a person with clear eyes saw him they'd say, 'This
gentleman knows what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, and branches and
leaves are. That's why he cut out just the heartwood and departed
knowing it was heartwood. Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he
will succeed.' ...

It's impossible for that mendicant to fall away from that irreversible
freedom.

And so, mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of
possessions, honor, and popularity, or for accomplishment in ethics, or
for accomplishment in immersion, or for knowledge and vision. Rather,
the goal, heartwood, and final end of the spiritual life is the
unshakable freedom of
heart."[745](endnotes.xhtml_note-745){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-745
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn30">

### [MN 30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Simile of the Heartwood ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷasāropamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the brahmin Piṅgalakoccha went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with
him.[746](endnotes.xhtml_note-746){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-746
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, there are those ascetics and brahmins who lead an order
and a community, and teach a community. They're well-known and famous
religious founders, deemed holy by many people. Namely: Pūraṇa Kassapa,
the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, Ajita of the hair blanket, Pakudha
Kaccāyana, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, and the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika
clan. According to their own claims, did all of them have direct
knowledge, or none of them, or only
some?"[747](endnotes.xhtml_note-747){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-747
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Enough, brahmin, let this
be:[748](endnotes.xhtml_note-748){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-748
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'According to their own claims, did all of
them have direct knowledge, or none of them, or only some?' I will teach
you the Dhamma. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Piṅgalakoccha replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, softwood, bark, and shoots,
he'd cut off the branches and leaves and depart imagining they were
heartwood. If a person with clear eyes saw him they'd say: 'This
gentleman doesn't know what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or
branches and leaves are. That's why he passed them over, cut off the
branches and leaves, and departed imagining they were heartwood.
Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won't succeed.'

Suppose there was another person in need of heartwood ... he'd cut off
the shoots and depart imagining they were heartwood ...

Suppose there was another person in need of heartwood ... he'd cut off
the bark and depart imagining it was heartwood ...

Suppose there was another person in need of heartwood ... he'd cut out
the softwood and depart imagining it was heartwood ...

Suppose there was another person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. He'd cut out just the heartwood and depart knowing it
was heartwood. If a person with clear eyes saw him they'd say: 'This
gentleman knows what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and
leaves are. That's why he cut out just the heartwood and departed
knowing it was heartwood. Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he
will succeed.'

In the same way, take a certain person who goes forth from the lay life
to homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by rebirth, old age, and death;
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this
entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth they generate
possessions, honor, and popularity. They're happy with that, and they've
got all they wished for. And they glorify themselves and put others down
on account of that: 'I'm the one with possessions, honor, and
popularity. These other mendicants are obscure and insignificant.' They
become lazy and slack on account of their possessions, honor, and
popularity, not generating enthusiasm or trying to realize those things
that are better and finer.
...[749](endnotes.xhtml_note-749){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-749
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're like the person who mistakes
branches and leaves for heartwood, I say.

Next, take a person who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness ... When they've gone forth they generate possessions,
honor, and popularity. They're not happy with that, and haven't got all
they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that. They don't become lazy and slack regarding their
possessions, honor, and popularity, but generate enthusiasm and try to
realize those things that are better and finer. They achieve
accomplishment in ethics. They're happy with that, and they've got all
they wished for. And they glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that: 'I'm the one who is ethical, of good character. These
other mendicants are unethical, of bad character.' They become lazy and
slack regarding their accomplishment in ethics, not generating
enthusiasm or trying to realize those things that are better and finer.
... They're like the person who mistakes shoots for heartwood, I say.

Next, take a person who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness ... They achieve accomplishment in ethics ... and
immersion. ... They become lazy and slack regarding their accomplishment
in immersion, not generating enthusiasm or trying to realize those
things that are better and finer. ... They're like the person who
mistakes bark for heartwood, I say.

Next, take a person who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness ... They achieve accomplishment in ethics ... immersion ...
and knowledge and vision. They become lazy and slack regarding their
knowledge and vision, not generating enthusiasm or trying to realize
those things that are better and finer. ... They're like the person who
mistakes softwood for heartwood, I say.

Next, take a person who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this
entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth they generate
possessions, honor, and popularity. They're not happy with that, and
haven't got all they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put
others down on account of that. They don't become lazy and slack on
account of their possessions, honor, and popularity, but generate
enthusiasm and try to realize those things that are better and finer.
They become accomplished in ethics. They're happy with that, but they
haven't got all they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put
others down on account of that. They don't become lazy and slack
regarding their accomplishment in ethics, but generate enthusiasm and
try to realize those things that are better and finer. They become
accomplished in immersion. They're happy with that, but they haven't got
all they wished for. They don't glorify themselves and put others down
on account of that. They don't become lazy and slack regarding their
accomplishment in immersion, but generate enthusiasm and try to realize
those things that are better and finer. They achieve knowledge and
vision. They're happy with that, but they haven't got all they wished
for. They don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of
that. They don't become lazy and slack regarding their knowledge and
vision, but generate enthusiasm and try to realize those things that are
better and finer.

And what are those things that are better and finer than knowledge and
vision?

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it
connected.[750](endnotes.xhtml_note-750){#mn-opammavagga.xhtml_noteref-750
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is something better and finer than
knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This too
is something better and finer than knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This too
is something better and finer than knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This too
is something better and finer than knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. This too is something better and finer than
knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. This too is something better and
finer than knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. This too is something better and finer
than knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. This too is something better and finer than
knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. This too is something better and finer than
knowledge and vision. These are the things that are better and finer
than knowledge and vision.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in
search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing with
heartwood. He'd cut out just the heartwood and depart knowing it was
heartwood. Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he will succeed.
That's what this person is like, I say.

And so, brahmin, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of
possessions, honor, and popularity, or for accomplishment in ethics, or
for accomplishment in immersion, or for knowledge and vision. Rather,
the goal, heartwood, and final end of the spiritual life is the
unshakable freedom of heart."

When he had spoken, the brahmin Piṅgalakoccha said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>

[]{#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml}

## The Greater Chapter on Pairs {#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_mn-mahayamakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn31">

### [MN 31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse at Gosiṅga ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷagosiṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[751](endnotes.xhtml_note-751){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-751
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
at Ñātika in the brick
house.[752](endnotes.xhtml_note-752){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-752
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila were
staying in the sal forest park at
Gosiṅga.[753](endnotes.xhtml_note-753){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-753
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
that park. The park keeper saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance[754](endnotes.xhtml_note-754){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-754
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and said to him, "Don't come into this
park, ascetic. There are three gentlemen staying here whose nature is to
desire only the
self.[755](endnotes.xhtml_note-755){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-755
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do not disturb them."

Anuruddha heard the park keeper conversing with the Buddha, and said to
him, "Don't keep the Buddha out, good park keeper! Our Teacher, the
Blessed One, has arrived." Then Anuruddha went to Nandiya and Kimbila,
and said to them, "Come forth, venerables, come forth! Our Teacher, the
Blessed One, has arrived!"

Then Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila came out to greet the Buddha. One
received his bowl and robe, one spread out a seat, and one set out water
for washing his feet. The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, and washed
his feet. Those venerables bowed and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to Anuruddha, "I hope you're keeping well, Anuruddha and
friends; I hope you're all right. And I hope you're having no trouble
getting
almsfood."[756](endnotes.xhtml_note-756){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-756
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"We're keeping well, Blessed One, we're getting by. And we have no
trouble getting almsfood."

"I hope you're living in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly
eyes?"[757](endnotes.xhtml_note-757){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-757
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed, sir, we live in harmony like this."

"But how do you live this way?"

"In this case, sir, I think, 'I'm fortunate, so very fortunate, to live
together with spiritual companions such as these.' I consistently treat
these venerables with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in
public and in
private.[758](endnotes.xhtml_note-758){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-758
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I think, 'Why don't I set aside my own
ideas and just go along with these venerables' ideas?' And that's what I
do. Though we're different in body, sir, we're one in mind, it seems to
me."

And the venerables Nandiya and Kimbila spoke likewise, and they added:
"That's how we live in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly eyes."

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! But I hope you're living diligently,
keen, and
resolute?"[759](endnotes.xhtml_note-759){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-759
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed, sir, we live diligently."

"But how do you live this way?"

"In this case, sir, whoever returns first from almsround prepares the
seats, and puts out the drinking water and the rubbish bin. If there's
anything left over, whoever returns last eats it if they like. Otherwise
they throw it out where there is little that grows, or drop it into
water that has no living creatures. Then they put away the seats,
drinking water, and rubbish bin, and sweep the refectory. If someone
sees that the pot of water for washing, drinking, or the toilet is empty
they set it up. If he can't do it, he summons another with a wave of the
hand, and they set it up by lending each other a hand to lift. But we
don't break into speech for that
reason.[760](endnotes.xhtml_note-760){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-760
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And every five days we sit together for the
whole night and discuss the
teachings.[761](endnotes.xhtml_note-761){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-761
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how we live diligently, keen, and
resolute."[762](endnotes.xhtml_note-762){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-762
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! But as you live diligently like
this, have you achieved any superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, we enter and remain in
the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[763](endnotes.xhtml_note-763){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-763
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation,
that we have achieved while living diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that
meditation?"[764](endnotes.xhtml_note-764){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-764
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, we enter and remain in the second
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with
internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping
it connected. This is another superhuman distinction that we have
achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, with the fading away of
rapture, we enter and remain in the third absorption, where we meditate
with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for
going beyond and stilling that meditation."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, with the giving up of pleasure
and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, we enter and
remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure
equanimity and mindfulness. This is another superhuman distinction that
we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, going totally beyond
perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not
focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', we
enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. This is another
superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and
stilling that meditation."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', we
enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ... going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', we enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. ... going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, we
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. This is another superhuman distinction that we have
achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation."

"Good, good! But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for
going beyond and stilling that meditation?"

"How could we not, sir? Whenever we want, going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, we enter and remain
in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with
wisdom, our defilements have come to an end. This is another superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a
comfortable meditation, that we have achieved for going beyond and
stilling that meditation. And we don't see any better or finer way of
meditating comfortably than this."

"Good, good! There is no better or finer way of meditating comfortably
than this."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the
venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila with a Dhamma talk, after
which he got up from his seat and left.

The venerables then accompanied the Buddha for a little way before
turning back. Nandiya and Kimbila said to Anuruddha, "Did we ever tell
you that we had gained such and such meditations and attainments, up to
the ending of defilements, as you revealed to the
Buddha?"[765](endnotes.xhtml_note-765){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-765
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The venerables did not tell me that they had gained such meditations
and attainments. But I discovered it by comprehending your minds, and
deities also told me. I answered when the Buddha directly asked about
it."

Then the native spirit Dīgha Parajana went up to the Buddha, bowed,
stood to one side, and said to
him,[766](endnotes.xhtml_note-766){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-766
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "The Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people
are so very
lucky[767](endnotes.xhtml_note-767){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-767
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that the Realized One, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well as these three gentlemen,
the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila."

Hearing the cry of Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods raised the cry ...

Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings ...
the gods of the thirty-three ... the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods
... the gods who love to imagine ... the gods who control what is
imagined by others ... the gods of Brahmā's host raised the cry, "The
Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people are so very lucky that the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well
as these three gentlemen, the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and
Kimbila."

And so at that moment, that second, that hour, those venerables were
known as far as the Brahmā realm.

"That's so true, Dīgha! That's so true! If the family from which those
three gentlemen went forth from the lay life to homelessness were to
recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for that
family's lasting welfare and happiness. If the family circle ... village
... town ... city ... country ... all the aristocrats ... all the
brahmins ... all the peasants ... all the workers were to recollect
those venerables with confident heart, that would be for all those
menials' lasting welfare and happiness.

If the whole world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---were to recollect
those venerables with confident heart, that would be for the whole
world's lasting welfare and happiness.

See, Dīgha, how those three gentlemen are practicing for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the native spirit Dīgha
Parajana approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn32">

### [MN 32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse at Gosiṅga ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāgosiṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the sal
forest park at Gosiṅga, together with several well-known senior
disciples, such
as[768](endnotes.xhtml_note-768){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-768
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna,
Mahākassapa, Anuruddha, Revata, Ānanda, and others.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, and said, "Come, Reverend
Kassapa, let's go to Venerable Sāriputta to hear the teaching."

"Yes, reverend," Mahākassapa replied. Then, together with Venerable
Anuruddha, they went to Sāriputta to hear the teaching.

Seeing them, Venerable Ānanda went to Venerable Revata, told him what
was happening, and invited him also.

Sāriputta saw them coming off in the distance and said to Ānanda, "Come,
Venerable Ānanda. Welcome to Ānanda, the Buddha's attendant, who is so
close to the Buddha. Ānanda, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely,
the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly
scents seem to float on the air. What kind of mendicant would beautify
this park?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's a mendicant who is very learned, remembering
and keeping what they've learned. These teachings are good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's entirely full and
pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them,
rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them
theoretically.[769](endnotes.xhtml_note-769){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-769
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they teach the four assemblies in order
to uproot the underlying tendencies with well-rounded and coherent words
and
phrases.[770](endnotes.xhtml_note-770){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-770
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park."

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Revata, "Reverend Revata, Ānanda
has answered by speaking from his heart. And now we ask you the same
question."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's a mendicant who enjoys retreat and loves
retreat. They're committed to inner serenity of the heart, they don't
neglect absorption, they're endowed with discernment, and they frequent
empty
huts.[771](endnotes.xhtml_note-771){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-771
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park."

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Anuruddha, "Reverend Anuruddha,
Revata has answered by speaking from his heart. And now we ask you the
same question."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's a mendicant who surveys a -thousandfold galaxy
with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the
human,[772](endnotes.xhtml_note-772){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-772
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} just as a person with clear eyes could
survey a thousand orbits from the upper floor of a royal
longhouse.[773](endnotes.xhtml_note-773){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-773
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park."

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Mahākassapa, "Reverend Kassapa,
Anuruddha has answered by speaking from his heart. And now we ask you
the same question."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's a mendicant who lives in the wilderness, eats
only almsfood, wears rag robes, and owns just three robes; and they
praise these things. They are of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof,
and energetic; and they praise these things. They are accomplished in
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom; and they praise these
things.[774](endnotes.xhtml_note-774){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-774
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park."

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Mahāmoggallāna, "Reverend
Moggallāna, Mahākassapa has answered by speaking from his heart. And now
we ask you the same question."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's when two mendicants engage in discussion about
the teaching. They question each other and answer each other's questions
without faltering, and their discussion on the teaching flows
on.[775](endnotes.xhtml_note-775){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-775
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park."

Then Mahāmoggallāna said to Sāriputta, "Each of us has spoken from our
heart. And now we ask you: Sāriputta, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is
lovely, the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and
heavenly scents seem to float on the air. What kind of mendicant would
beautify this park?"

"Reverend Moggallāna, it's when a mendicant masters their mind and is
not mastered by
it.[776](endnotes.xhtml_note-776){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-776
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the morning, they abide in whatever
meditation or attainment they want. At midday, and in the evening, they
abide in whatever meditation or attainment they want. Suppose that a
ruler or their minister had a chest full of garments of different
colors. In the morning, they'd don whatever pair of garments they
wanted. At midday, and in the evening, they'd don whatever pair of
garments they wanted.

In the same way, a mendicant masters their mind and is not mastered by
it. In the morning, they abide in whatever meditation or attainment they
want. At midday, and in the evening, they abide in whatever meditation
or attainment they want. That's the kind of mendicant who would beautify
this park."

Then Sāriputta said to those venerables, "Each of us has spoken from the
heart. Come, reverends, let's go to the Buddha, and inform him about
this. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Then those venerables went to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. Venerable Sāriputta told the Buddha of
how the mendicants had come to see him, and how he had asked Ānanda:
"'Ānanda, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is bright,
the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to float on
the air. What kind of mendicant would beautify this park?' When I had
spoken, Ānanda said to me: 'Reverend Sāriputta, it's a mendicant who is
very learned ... That's the kind of mendicant who would beautify this
park.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Ānanda answered in the right way for him. For
Ānanda is very learned ..."

"Next I asked Revata the same question. He said: 'It's a mendicant who
enjoys retreat ... That's the kind of mendicant who would beautify this
park.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Revata answered in the right way for him. For
Revata enjoys retreat ..."

"Next I asked Anuruddha the same question. He said: 'It's a mendicant
who surveys the thousandfold galaxy with clairvoyance that is purified
and surpasses the human ... That's the kind of mendicant who would
beautify this park.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Anuruddha answered in the right way for him. For
Anuruddha surveys the thousandfold galaxy with clairvoyance that is
purified and surpasses the human."

"Next I asked Mahākassapa the same question. He said: 'It's a mendicant
who lives in the wilderness ... and is accomplished in the knowledge and
vision of freedom; and they praise these things. That's the kind of
mendicant who would beautify this park.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Kassapa answered in the right way for him. For
Kassapa lives in the wilderness ... and is accomplished in the knowledge
and vision of freedom; and he praises these things."

"Next I asked Mahāmoggallāna the same question. He said: 'It's when two
mendicants engage in discussion about the teaching ... That's the kind
of mendicant who would beautify this park.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Moggallāna answered in the right way for him.
For Moggallāna is a Dhamma speaker."

When he had spoken, Moggallāna said to the Buddha, "Next, I asked
Sāriputta: 'Each of us has spoken from our heart. And now we ask you:
Sāriputta, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is
bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to
float on the air. What kind of mendicant would beautify this park?' When
I had spoken, Sāriputta said to me: 'Reverend Moggallāna, it's when a
mendicant masters their mind and is not mastered by it ... That's the
kind of mendicant who would beautify this park.'"

"Good, good, Moggallāna! Sāriputta answered in the right way for him.
For Sāriputta masters his mind and is not mastered by it ..."

When he had spoken, Sāriputta asked the Buddha, "Sir, who has spoken
well?"

"You've all spoken well in your own
way.[777](endnotes.xhtml_note-777){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-777
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} However, listen to me also as to what kind
of mendicant would beautify this sal forest park at Gosiṅga. It's a
mendicant who, after the meal, returns from almsround, sits down
cross-legged, sets their body straight, and establishes mindfulness in
their presence,
thinking:[778](endnotes.xhtml_note-778){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-778
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I will not break this sitting posture
until my mind is freed from the defilements by not grasping!' That's the
kind of mendicant who would beautify this park."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, those venerables approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn33">

### [MN 33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Cowherd ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāgopālakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can't maintain and expand a
herd of
cattle.[779](endnotes.xhtml_note-779){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-779
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eleven? It's when a cowherd doesn't
know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn't pick out flies'
eggs, doesn't dress wounds, doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford,
doesn't know satisfaction, doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in
pastures, milks dry, and doesn't show extra respect to the bulls who are
fathers and leaders of the
herd.[780](endnotes.xhtml_note-780){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-780
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A cowherd with these eleven factors can't
maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant doesn't know form, is unskilled in
characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't dress wounds,
doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know satisfaction,
doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and
doesn't show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long
gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant not know form? It's when a mendicant doesn't
truly understand that all form is the four principal states, or form
derived from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant doesn't
know form.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics? It's when a
mendicant doesn't understand that a fool is characterized by their
deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds. That's how
a mendicant isn't skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant not pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don't give
them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's
how a mendicant doesn't pick out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant not dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details. Since
the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don't practice
restraint, they don't protect the faculty of sight, and they don't
achieve its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ... smell
an odor with their nose ... taste a flavor with their tongue ... feel a
touch with their body ... know an idea with their mind, they get caught
up in the features and details. Since the faculty of the mind is left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
become overwhelming. They don't practice restraint, they don't protect
the faculty of the mind, and they don't achieve its restraint. That's
how a mendicant doesn't dress wounds.

And how does a mendicant not spread smoke? It's when a mendicant doesn't
teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.
That's how a mendicant doesn't spread smoke.

And how does a mendicant not know the
ford?[781](endnotes.xhtml_note-781){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-781
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant doesn't from time to
time go up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---and ask them
questions:[782](endnotes.xhtml_note-782){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-782
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Why, sir, does it say this? What does that
mean?' Those venerables don't clarify what is unclear, reveal what is
obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. That's
how a mendicant doesn't know the ford.

And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant,
when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds no inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds
no joy connected with the
teaching.[783](endnotes.xhtml_note-783){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-783
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant doesn't know
satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant not know the trail? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the noble eightfold path. That's how a
mendicant doesn't know the trail.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.[784](endnotes.xhtml_note-784){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-784
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant is not skilled in
pastures.

And how does a mendicant milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited by a
householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick, and that mendicant doesn't know moderation in
accepting. That's how a mendicant milks dry.

And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of
long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? It's
when a mendicant doesn't consistently treat senior mendicants of long
standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with
kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in
private. That's how a mendicant doesn't show extra respect to senior
mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the
Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.
What eleven? It's when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in
characteristics, picks out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke,
knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in
pastures, doesn't milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are
fathers and leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can
maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks
out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows
satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn't milk dry,
and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone
forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant know form? It's when a mendicant truly
understands that all form is the four principal states, or form derived
from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant knows form.

And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics? It's when a mendicant
understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute
person is characterized by their deeds. That's how a mendicant is
skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
doesn't tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen.
They don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but
give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.
That's how a mendicant picks out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details.
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities
of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this
reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and
achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ...
smell an odor with their nose ... taste a flavor with their tongue ...
feel a touch with their body ... know an idea with their mind, they
don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind
were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice
restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.
That's how a mendicant dresses wounds.

And how does a mendicant spread smoke? It's when a mendicant teaches
others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it. That's how
a mendicant spreads smoke.

And how does a mendicant know the ford? It's when from time to time a
mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors
of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and
the outlines---and asks them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a mendicant knows the ford.

And how does a mendicant know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant, when
the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy
connected with the teaching. That's how a mendicant knows satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant know the trail? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the noble eightfold path. That's how a mendicant knows the
trail.

And how is a mendicant skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. That's how a
mendicant is skilled in pastures.

And how does a mendicant not milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited
by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick, and that mendicant knows moderation in accepting.
That's how a mendicant doesn't milk dry.

And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long
standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? It's when
a mendicant consistently treats senior mendicants of long standing, long
gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of
body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. That's how a
mendicant shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing,
long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement,
and maturity in this teaching and training."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn34">

### [MN 34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Cowherd ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷagopālakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Vajjis near Ukkacelā on the bank of the Ganges
river.[785](endnotes.xhtml_note-785){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-785
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Once upon a time, mendicants, there was an unintelligent Magadhan
cowherd. In the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, without
inspecting the near shore or the far shore, he drove his cattle across a
place with no ford on the Ganges river to the northern shore among the
Suvidehans.[786](endnotes.xhtml_note-786){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-786
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But the cattle bunched up in mid-stream and came to ruin right there.
Why is that? Because the unintelligent cowherd failed to inspect the
shores before driving the cattle across at a place with no ford. In the
same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who are unskilled in this
world and the other world, unskilled in Māra's domain and its opposite,
and unskilled in Death's domain and its opposite. If anyone thinks they
are worth listening to and trusting, it will be for their lasting harm
and suffering.

Once upon a time, mendicants, there was an intelligent Magadhan cowherd.
In the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, after inspecting the
near shore and the far shore, he drove his cattle across a ford on the
Ganges river to the northern shore among the Suvidehans.

First he drove across the bulls, the fathers and leaders of the herd.
They breasted the stream of the Ganges and safely reached the far shore.
Then he drove across the strong and tractable cattle. They too breasted
the stream of the Ganges and safely reached the far shore. Then he drove
across the bullocks and heifers. They too breasted the stream of the
Ganges and safely reached the far shore. Then he drove across the calves
and weak cattle. They too breasted the stream of the Ganges and safely
reached the far shore. Once it happened that a baby calf had just been
born. Urged on by its mother's lowing, even it managed to breast the
stream of the Ganges and safely reach the far
shore.[787](endnotes.xhtml_note-787){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-787
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because the intelligent
cowherd inspected both shores before driving the cattle across at a
ford.

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who are skilled in this
world and the other world, skilled in Māra's domain and its opposite,
and skilled in Death's domain and its opposite. If anyone thinks they
are worth listening to and trusting, it will be for their lasting
welfare and happiness.

Just like the bulls, fathers and leaders of the herd, who crossed the
Ganges to safety are the mendicants who are perfected, who have ended
the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the
fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through
enlightenment. Having breasted Māra's stream, they have safely crossed
over to the far shore.

Just like the strong and tractable cattle who crossed the Ganges to
safety are the mendicants who, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, are reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. They too, having breasted Māra's
stream, will safely cross over to the far shore.

Just like the bullocks and heifers who crossed the Ganges to safety are
the mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening
of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners. They come back to this
world once only, then make an end of suffering. They too, having
breasted Māra's stream, will safely cross over to the far shore.

Just like the calves and weak cattle who crossed the Ganges to safety
are the mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening. They too, having breasted Māra's stream, will safely cross
over to the far shore.

Just like the baby calf who had just been born, but, urged on by its
mother's lowing, still managed to cross the Ganges to safety are the
mendicants who are followers of teachings, followers by faith. They too,
having breasted Māra's stream, will safely cross over to the far shore.

Mendicants, I am skilled in this world and the other world, skilled in
Māra's domain and its opposite, and skilled in Death's domain and its
opposite. If anyone thinks I am worth listening to and trusting, it will
be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:[788](endnotes.xhtml_note-788){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-788
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "This world and the other
> world[789](endnotes.xhtml_note-789){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-789
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> have been clearly explained by one who knows;\
> as well as Māra's reach,\
> and what's out of Death's reach.
>
> Directly knowing the whole world,\
> the Buddha who understands\
> has opened the door to freedom from
> death,[790](endnotes.xhtml_note-790){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-790
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> for finding the sanctuary, extinguishment.
>
> The Wicked One's stream has been cut,\
> it's blown away and mown down.\
> Be full of joy, mendicants,\
> set your heart on
> sanctuary!"[791](endnotes.xhtml_note-791){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-791
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn35">

### [MN 35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Saccaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷasaccakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time Saccaka, the son of Jain parents, was staying in
Vesālī. He was a debater and clever speaker deemed holy by many
people.[792](endnotes.xhtml_note-792){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-792
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He was telling a crowd in Vesālī, "I don't
see any ascetic or brahmin who would not shake and rock and tremble,
sweating from the armpits, were I to take them on in debate---not a
leader of an order or a community, or the tutor of a community, and not
even one who claims to be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. Even
an insentient post would shake and rock and tremble were I to take it on
in debate. How much more then a human being!"

Then Venerable Assaji robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Vesālī for
alms.[793](endnotes.xhtml_note-793){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-793
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As Saccaka was going for a walk he saw
Assaji coming off in the distance. He approached him and exchanged
greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Saccaka stood to
one side and said to Assaji, "Mister Assaji, how does the ascetic Gotama
guide his disciples? And on what topics does instruction to his
disciples generally
proceed?"[794](endnotes.xhtml_note-794){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-794
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Aggivessana, this is how the ascetic Gotama guides his disciples, and
his instructions to disciples generally proceed on these
topics:[795](endnotes.xhtml_note-795){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-795
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are
impermanent.[796](endnotes.xhtml_note-796){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-796
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are not-self. All conditions are impermanent. All things
are not-self.' This is how the ascetic Gotama guides his disciples, and
how instruction to his disciples generally
proceeds."[797](endnotes.xhtml_note-797){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-797
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's sad to hear, Mister Assaji, that the ascetic Gotama has such a
doctrine. Hopefully, some time or other I'll get to meet Mister Gotama,
and we can have a discussion. And hopefully I can dissuade him from this
harmful misconception."

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were sitting together at
the town hall on some
business.[798](endnotes.xhtml_note-798){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-798
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Saccaka went up to them and said,
"Come forth, good Licchavīs, come forth! Today I am going to have a
discussion with the ascetic Gotama. If he stands by the position stated
to me by one of his well-known disciples---a mendicant named
Assaji---I'll take him on in debate and drag him to and fro and round
about, like a strong man would grab a fleecy sheep and drag it to and
fro and round about! Taking him on in debate, I'll drag him to and fro
and round about, like a strong brewer's worker would toss a large
brewer's sieve into a deep lake, grab it by the corners, and drag it to
and fro and round about! Taking him on in debate, I'll shake him down
and about, and give him a beating, like a strong brewer's mixer would
grab a strainer by the corners and shake it down and about, and give it
a
beating\![799](endnotes.xhtml_note-799){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-799
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll play a game of ear-washing with the
ascetic Gotama, like a sixty-year-old elephant would plunge into a deep
lotus pond and play a game of
ear-washing\![800](endnotes.xhtml_note-800){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-800
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Come forth, good Licchavīs, come forth!
Today I am going to have a discussion with the ascetic Gotama."

At that, some of the Licchavis said, "How can the ascetic Gotama refute
Saccaka's doctrine, when it is Saccaka who will refute Gotama's
doctrine?"

But some of the Licchavis said, "Who is Saccaka to refute the Buddha's
doctrine, when it is the Buddha who will refute Saccaka's doctrine?"

Then Saccaka, escorted by the five hundred Licchavis, went to the hall
with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air.
Then Saccaka went up to them and said, "Good sirs, where is Mister
Gotama at present? For we want to see him."

"Aggivessana, the Buddha has plunged deep into the Great Wood and is
sitting at the root of a tree for the day's meditation."

Then Saccaka, together with a large group of Licchavis, went to see the
Buddha in the Great Wood, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.
Before sitting down to one side, some of the Licchavīs bowed, some
exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined
palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some
kept silent.

Then Saccaka said to the Buddha, "I'd like to ask Mister Gotama about a
certain point, if you'd take the time to answer."

"Ask what you wish, Aggivessana."

"How does Mister Gotama guide his disciples? And on what topics does
instruction to his disciples generally proceed?"

"This is how I guide my disciples, and my instructions to disciples
generally proceed on these
topics:[801](endnotes.xhtml_note-801){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-801
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are impermanent. Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are not-self. All conditions are impermanent. All things
are not-self.' This is how I guide my disciples, and how instruction to
my disciples generally proceeds."

"A simile strikes me, Mister Gotama."

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said the Buddha.

"All the plants and seeds that achieve growth, increase, and maturity do
so depending on the earth and grounded on the
earth.[802](endnotes.xhtml_note-802){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-802
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} All the hard work that gets done depends on
the earth and is grounded on the earth.

In the same way, an individual's self is form. Grounded on form they
create merit and wickedness. An individual's self is feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness. Grounded on consciousness they
create merit and
wickedness."[803](endnotes.xhtml_note-803){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-803
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Aggivessana, are you not saying this: 'Form is my self, feeling is my
self, perception is my self, choices are my self, consciousness is my
self'?"

"Indeed, Mister Gotama, that is what I am saying. And this big crowd
agrees with me!"

"What has this big crowd to do with you? Please just unpack your own
statement."

"Then, Mister Gotama, what I am saying is this: 'Form is my self,
feeling is my self, perception is my self, choices are my self,
consciousness is my self'."

"Well then, Aggivessana, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, Aggivessana? Consider an anointed
aristocratic king such as Pasenadi of Kosala or Ajātasattu of Magadha,
son of the princess of Videha. Would they have the power in their own
realm to execute those who have incurred execution, fine those who have
incurred fines, or banish those who have incurred
banishment?"[804](endnotes.xhtml_note-804){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-804
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"An anointed king would have such power, Mister Gotama. Even federations
such as the Vajjis and Mallas have such power in their own
realm.[805](endnotes.xhtml_note-805){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-805
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So of course an anointed king such as
Pasenadi or Ajātasattu would wield such power, as is their
right."[806](endnotes.xhtml_note-806){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-806
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say, 'Form is my self,' do you
have power over that form to say: 'May my form be like this! May it not
be like
that'?"[807](endnotes.xhtml_note-807){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-807
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he said this, Saccaka kept silent. The
Buddha asked the question a second time, but Saccaka still kept silent.
So the Buddha said to Saccaka, "Answer now, Aggivessana. Now is not the
time for silence. If someone fails to answer a legitimate question when
asked three times by the Buddha, their head explodes into seven pieces
there and
then."[808](endnotes.xhtml_note-808){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-808
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the spirit Vajirapāṇī, taking up a burning iron
thunderbolt, blazing and glowing, stood in the air above Saccaka,
thinking,[809](endnotes.xhtml_note-809){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-809
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "If this Saccaka doesn't answer when asked
a third time, I'll blow his head into seven pieces there and then!" And
both the Buddha and Saccaka could see Vajirapāṇī.

Saccaka was terrified, shocked, and awestruck. Looking to the Buddha for
shelter, protection, and refuge, he said, "Ask me, Mister Gotama. I will
answer."

"What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say, 'Form is my self,' do you
have power over that form to say: 'May my form be like this! May it not
be like that'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Think about it,
Aggivessana\![810](endnotes.xhtml_note-810){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-810
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should think before answering. What you
said before and what you said after don't match up. What do you think,
Aggivessana? When you say, 'Feeling is my self,' do you have power over
that feeling to say: 'May my feeling be like this! May it not be like
that'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Think about it, Aggivessana! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. What do you
think, Aggivessana? When you say, 'Perception is my self,' do you have
power over that perception to say: 'May my perception be like this! May
it not be like that'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Think about it, Aggivessana! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. What do you
think, Aggivessana? When you say, 'Choices are my self,' do you have
power over those choices to say: 'May my choices be like this! May they
not be like that'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Think about it, Aggivessana! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. What do you
think, Aggivessana? When you say, 'Consciousness is my self,' do you
have power over that consciousness to say: 'May my consciousness be like
this! May it not be like that'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Think about it, Aggivessana! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. What do you
think, Aggivessana? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or
happiness?"[811](endnotes.xhtml_note-811){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-811
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Suffering."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self'?"[812](endnotes.xhtml_note-812){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-812
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Aggivessana? Is feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Aggivessana? Consider someone who resorts, draws
near, and clings to suffering, regarding it thus: 'This is mine, I am
this, this is my self.' Would such a person be able to completely
understand suffering themselves, or live having wiped out suffering?"

"How could they? No, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Aggivessana? This being so, aren't you someone who
resorts, draws near, and clings to suffering, regarding it thus: 'This
is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"How could I not? Yes, Mister Gotama."

"Suppose, Aggivessana, there was a person in need of heartwood.
Wandering in search of heartwood, they'd take a sharp axe and enter a
forest. There they'd see a big banana tree, straight and young and grown
free of defects. They'd cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and
unroll the coiled sheaths. But they wouldn't even find sapwood, much
less heartwood.

In the same way, when pursued, pressed, and grilled by me on your own
doctrine, you turn out to be vacuous, hollow, and mistaken. But it was
you who stated before the assembly of Vesālī: 'I don't see any ascetic
or brahmin who would not shake and rock and tremble, sweating from the
armpits, were I to take them on in debate---not a leader of an order or
a community, or the tutor of a community, and not even one who claims to
be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. Even an insentient post
would shake and rock and tremble were I to take it on in debate. How
much more then a human being!' But sweat is pouring from your forehead;
it's soaked through your robe and drips on the
ground.[813](endnotes.xhtml_note-813){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-813
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} While I now have no sweat on my body." So
the Buddha revealed his golden body to the assembly. When this was said,
Saccaka sat silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed,
with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Licchavi Dummukha said to the
Buddha,[814](endnotes.xhtml_note-814){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-814
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "A simile strikes me, Blessed One."

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said the Buddha.

"Sir, suppose there was a lotus pond not far from a town or village, and
a crab lived there. Then several boys or girls would leave the town or
village and go to the pond, where they'd pull out the crab and put it on
dry land. Whenever that crab extended a claw, those boys or girls would
snap, crack, and break it off with a stick or a stone. And when that
crab's claws had all been snapped, cracked, and broken off it wouldn't
be able to return down into that lotus pond. In the same way, sir, the
Buddha has snapped, cracked, and broken off all Saccaka's twists, ducks,
and dodges. Now he can't get near the Buddha again looking for a
debate."

But Saccaka said to him, "Hold on, Dummukha, hold on! I wasn't talking
with you, I was talking with Mister Gotama.

Mister Gotama, leave aside that statement I made---as did various other
ascetics and brahmins---it was, like, just a bit of
nonsense.[815](endnotes.xhtml_note-815){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-815
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How do you define a disciple of Mister
Gotama who follows instructions and responds to advice; who has gone
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, gained assurance, and is
independent of others in the Teacher's instructions?"

"It's when one of my disciples truly sees any kind of form at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle;
inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.'[816](endnotes.xhtml_note-816){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-816
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They truly see any kind of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' That's how to define one
of my disciples who follows instructions and responds to advice; who has
gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, gained assurance, and is
independent of others in the Teacher's instructions."

"But how do you define a mendicant who is a perfected one, with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment?"

"It's when a mendicant truly sees any kind of form at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' And having seen this with
right understanding they're freed by not grasping. They truly see any
kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle;
inferior or superior; far or near: *all* consciousness---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'
And having seen this with right understanding they're freed by not
grasping. That's how to define a mendicant who is a perfected one, with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment.

A mendicant whose mind is freed like this has three unsurpassable
qualities: unsurpassable seeing, practice, and
freedom.[817](endnotes.xhtml_note-817){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-817
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They honor, respect, esteem, and venerate
only the Realized One: 'The Blessed One is awakened, tamed, serene,
crossed over, and quenched. And he teaches Dhamma for awakening,
self-control, serenity, crossing over, and extinguishment.'"

When he had spoken, Saccaka said to him, "Mister Gotama, it was rude and
impudent of me to imagine I could attack you in debate. For a person
might find safety after attacking a rutting elephant, but not after
attacking Mister Gotama. A person might find safety after attacking a
blazing mass of fire, but not after attacking Mister Gotama. They might
find safety after attacking a poisonous viper, but not after attacking
Mister Gotama. It was rude and impudent of me to imagine I could attack
you in debate. Would Mister Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha
please accept tomorrow's meal from me?" The Buddha consented with
silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Saccaka addressed those
Licchavis, "Listen, gentlemen. I have invited the ascetic Gotama
together with the Saṅgha of mendicants for tomorrow's meal. You may all
bring me what you think is suitable."

Then, when the night had passed, those Licchavis presented Saccaka with
an offering of five hundred servings of
food.[818](endnotes.xhtml_note-818){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-818
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And Saccaka had delicious fresh and cooked
foods prepared in his own park. Then he had the Buddha informed of the
time, saying, "It's time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to Saccaka's park, where he sat on the seat spread out, together
with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Then Saccaka served and satisfied the
mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with delicious
fresh and cooked foods. When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand
and bowl, Saccaka took a low seat and sat to one side.

Then Saccaka said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, may the merit and the
growth of merit in this gift be for the happiness of the
donors."[819](endnotes.xhtml_note-819){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-819
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Aggivessana, whatever comes from giving to a recipient of a religious
donation such as yourself---who is not free of greed, hate, and
delusion---will accrue to the
donors.[820](endnotes.xhtml_note-820){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-820
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whatever comes from giving to a recipient
of a religious donation such as myself---who is free of greed, hate, and
delusion---will accrue to you."

</article>
<article id="mn36">

### [MN 36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Saccaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsaccakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time in the morning the Buddha, being properly dressed, took
his bowl and robe, wishing to enter Vesālī for alms.

Then as Saccaka, the son of Jain parents, was going for a walk he
approached the hall with the peaked roof in the Great
Wood.[821](endnotes.xhtml_note-821){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-821
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Venerable Ānanda saw him coming off in the
distance, and said to the Buddha, "Sir, Saccaka, the son of Jain
parents, is coming. He's a debater and clever speaker deemed holy by
many people. He wants to discredit the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha. Please, sir, sit for an hour out of sympathy." The Buddha sat on
the seat spread out.

Then Saccaka went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha,

"Mister Gotama, there are some ascetics and brahmins who live committed
to the practice of developing physical endurance, without developing the
mind.[822](endnotes.xhtml_note-822){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-822
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They suffer painful physical feelings. This
happened to someone once. Their thighs became paralyzed, their heart
burst, hot blood gushed from their mouth, and they went mad and lost
their mind. Their mind was subject to the body, and the body had power
over it. Why is that? Because their mind was not developed. There are
some ascetics and brahmins who live committed to the practice of
developing the mind, without developing physical endurance. They suffer
painful mental feelings. This happened to someone once. Their thighs
became paralyzed, their heart burst, hot blood gushed from their mouth,
and they went mad and lost their mind. Their body was subject to the
mind, and the mind had power over it. Why is that? Because their
physical endurance was not
developed.[823](endnotes.xhtml_note-823){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-823
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It occurs to me that Mister Gotama's
disciples must live committed to the practice of developing the mind,
without developing physical endurance."

"But Aggivessana, what have you heard about the development of physical
endurance?"

"Take, for example, Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and the bamboo-staffed
ascetic
Gosāla.[824](endnotes.xhtml_note-824){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-824
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They go naked, ignoring conventions. They
lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent
to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an
invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything from a pot or bowl;
or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in
their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who
is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for alms,
taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven
houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a
day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once every second
day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They
live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals."[825](endnotes.xhtml_note-825){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-825
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Aggivessana, do they get by on so little?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Sometimes they eat luxury fresh and cooked foods and
drink a variety of luxury beverages. They gather their body's strength,
build it up, and get fat."

"What they earlier gave up, they later got back. That is how there is
the increase and decrease of this body. But Aggivessana, what have you
heard about development of the mind?" When Saccaka was questioned by the
Buddha about development of the mind, he was
stumped.[826](endnotes.xhtml_note-826){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-826
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So the Buddha said to Saccaka, "The development of physical endurance
that you have described is not the legitimate development of physical
endurance in the noble one's training. And since you don't even
understand the development of physical endurance, how can you possibly
understand the development of the mind? Still, as to how someone is
undeveloped in physical endurance and mind, and how someone is developed
in physical endurance and mind, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Saccaka. The Buddha said this:

"And how is someone undeveloped in physical endurance and mind? Take an
unlearned ordinary person who has a pleasant feeling. When they
experience a pleasant feeling they become full of lust for it. Then that
pleasant feeling ceases. And when it ceases, a painful feeling arises.
When they suffer painful feeling, they sorrow and wail and lament,
beating their breast and falling into confusion. Because their physical
endurance is undeveloped, pleasant feelings occupy the mind. And because
their mind is undeveloped, painful feelings occupy the mind. Anyone
whose mind is occupied by both pleasant and painful feelings like this
is undeveloped both in physical endurance and in mind.

And how is someone developed in physical endurance and mind? Take a
learned noble disciple who has a pleasant feeling. When they experience
a pleasant feeling they don't become full of lust for it. Then that
pleasant feeling ceases. And when it ceases, painful feeling arises.
When they suffer painful feelings they don't sorrow or wail or lament,
beating their breast and falling into confusion. Because their physical
endurance is developed, pleasant feelings don't occupy the mind. And
because their mind is developed, painful feelings don't occupy the mind.
Anyone whose mind is not occupied by both pleasant and painful feelings
like this is developed both in physical endurance and in mind."

"I am quite confident that Mister Gotama is developed in physical
endurance and in mind."

"Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive,
Aggivessana.[827](endnotes.xhtml_note-827){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-827
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, I will answer you. Ever since
I shaved off my hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth
from the lay life to homelessness, it has not been possible for any
pleasant or painful feeling to occupy my
mind."[828](endnotes.xhtml_note-828){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-828
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mister Gotama mustn't have experienced the kind of pleasant or painful
feelings that would occupy the
mind."[829](endnotes.xhtml_note-829){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-829
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How could I not, Aggivessana? Before my awakening---when I was still
unawakened but intent on awakening---I thought: 'Life at home is cramped
and dirty, life gone forth is wide open. It's not easy for someone
living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a
polished shell. Why don't I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?'

Some time later, while still with pristine black hair, blessed with
youth, in the prime of life---though my mother and father wished
otherwise, weeping with tearful faces---I shaved off my hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness.

Once I had gone forth I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking
the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said
to
him,[830](endnotes.xhtml_note-830){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-830
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend Kālāma, I wish to lead the
spiritual life in this teaching and training.'

Āḷāra Kālāma replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a
sensible person can soon realize their own tradition with their own
insight and live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Āḷāra
Kālāma declares: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live
having achieved it." Surely he meditates knowing and seeing this
teaching.'

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, to what
extent do you say you've realized this teaching with your own insight?'
When I said this, he declared the dimension of nothingness.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Āḷāra Kālāma who has faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why
don't I make an effort to realize the same teaching that Āḷāra Kālāma
says he has realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that
teaching with my own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, is it up
to this point that you realized this teaching with your own insight, and
declare having achieved it?'

'I have, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
I've realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, I've realized with my own insight, and declare having
achieved it. So the teaching that I know, you know, and the teaching you
know, I know. I am like you and you are like me. Come now, reverend! We
should both lead this community together.' And that is how my tutor
Āḷāra Kālāma placed me, his student, on the same position as him, and
honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of nothingness.' Realizing
that this teaching was inadequate, I left disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,
'Reverend, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and
training.'

Uddaka replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a sensible
person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and
live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Rāma
declared: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having
achieved it." Surely he meditated knowing and seeing this teaching.'

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, to what
extent did Rāma say he'd realized this teaching with his own insight?'
When I said this, Uddaka son of Rāma declared the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Rāma who had faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why don't I
make an effort to realize the same teaching that Rāma said he had
realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that teaching with my
own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, had Rāma
realized this teaching with his own insight up to this point, and
declared having achieved it?'

'He had, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! The teaching that Rāma
had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it, you
have realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having
achieved it. So the teaching that Rāma directly knew, you know, and the
teaching you know, Rāma directly knew. Rāma was like you and you are
like Rāma. Come now, reverend! You should lead this community.' And that
is how my spiritual companion Uddaka son of Rāma placed me in the
position of a tutor and honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left
disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. Traveling stage by stage in the Magadhan lands, I arrived
at Senānigama in Uruvelā. There I saw a delightful park, a lovely grove
with a flowing river that was clean and charming, with smooth banks. And
nearby was a village to go for alms. Then it occurred to me, 'This park
is truly delightful, a lovely grove with a flowing river that's clean
and charming, with smooth banks. And nearby there's a village to go for
alms. This is good enough for striving for a gentleman wanting to
strive.' So I sat down right there, thinking: 'This is good enough for
striving.'

And then these three similes, which were neither supernaturally
inspired, nor learned before in the past, occurred to
me.[831](endnotes.xhtml_note-831){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-831
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a green, sappy log, and
it was lying in water. Then a person comes along with a drill-stick,
thinking to light a fire and produce heat. What do you think,
Aggivessana? By drilling the stick against that green, sappy log lying
in the water, could they light a fire and produce
heat?"[832](endnotes.xhtml_note-832){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-832
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama. Why not? Because it's a green, sappy log, and it's
lying in the water. That person will eventually get weary and
frustrated."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't live
withdrawn in body and mind from sensual pleasures. They haven't
internally given up or stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst,
and passion for sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they
feel painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion, they
are incapable of knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was
the first example that occurred to me.

Then a second example occurred to me. Suppose there was a green, sappy
log, and it was lying on dry land far from the water. Then a person
comes along with a drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and produce
heat. What do you think, Aggivessana? By drilling the stick against that
green, sappy log on dry land far from water, could they light a fire and
produce heat?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why not? Because it's still a green, sappy log,
despite the fact that it's lying on dry land far from water. That person
will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in
body and mind from sensual pleasures. But they haven't internally given
up or stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for
sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion, they are incapable of
knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was the second example
that occurred to me.

Then a third example occurred to me. Suppose there was a dried up,
withered log, and it was lying on dry land far from the water. Then a
person comes along with a drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and
produce heat. What do you think, Aggivessana? By drilling the stick
against that dried up, withered log on dry land far from water, could
they light a fire and produce heat?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because it's a dried up, withered log,
and it's lying on dry land far from water."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in
body and mind from sensual pleasures. And they have internally given up
and stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for
sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion, they are capable of
knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was the third example
that occurred to me. These are the three similes, which were neither
supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past, that occurred
to me.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I, with teeth clenched and tongue
pressed against the roof of my mouth, squeeze, squash, and scorch mind
with
mind?'[833](endnotes.xhtml_note-833){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-833
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So that's what I did, until sweat ran from
my armpits. It was like when a strong man grabs a weaker man by the head
or throat or shoulder and squeezes, squashes, and crushes them. In the
same way, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the roof of my
mouth, I squeezed, squashed, and crushed mind with mind until sweat ran
from my armpits. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving. But
even such painful feeling did not occupy my mind.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice the breathless
absorption?'[834](endnotes.xhtml_note-834){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-834
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I cut off my breathing through my mouth
and nose. But then winds came out my ears making a loud noise, like the
puffing of a blacksmith's bellows. My energy was roused up and
unflagging, and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body
was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that
painful striving. But even such painful feeling did not occupy my mind.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then strong winds ground my head, like a strong man was
drilling into my head with a sharp point. My energy was roused up and
unflagging, and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body
was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that
painful striving. But even such painful feeling did not occupy my mind.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then I got a severe headache, like a strong man was tightening
a tough leather strap around my head. My energy was roused up and
unflagging, and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body
was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that
painful striving. But even such painful feeling did not occupy my mind.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then strong winds carved up my belly, like a deft butcher or
their apprentice was slicing my belly open with a sharp meat cleaver. My
energy was roused up and unflagging, and my mindfulness was established
and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed
too hard with that painful striving. But even such painful feeling did
not occupy my mind.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then there was an intense burning in my body, like two strong
men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of
glowing coals. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving. But
even such painful feeling did not occupy my mind.

Then some deities saw me and said, 'The ascetic Gotama is dead.' Others
said, 'He's not dead, but he's dying.' Others said, 'He's not dead or
dying. The ascetic Gotama is a perfected one, for that is how the
perfected ones live.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice completely cutting off
food?' But deities came to me and said, 'Good sir, don't practice
totally cutting off food. If you do, we'll infuse heavenly nectar into
your pores and you will live on that.' Then I thought, 'If I claim to be
completely fasting while these deities are infusing heavenly nectar in
my pores, that would be a lie on my part.' So I dismissed those deities,
saying, 'There's no need.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I just take a little bit of food each
time, a cup of broth made from mung beans, horse gram, chickpeas, or
green gram?' So that's what I did, until my body became extremely
emaciated. Due to eating so little, my major and minor limbs became like
the joints of an eighty-year-old or a dying man, my bottom became like a
camel's hoof, my vertebrae stuck out like beads on a string, and my ribs
were as gaunt as the broken-down rafters on an old barn. Due to eating
so little, the gleam of my eyes sank deep in their sockets, like the
gleam of water sunk deep down a well. Due to eating so little, my scalp
shriveled and withered like a green bitter-gourd in the wind and sun.

Due to eating so little, the skin of my belly stuck to my backbone, so
that when I tried to rub the skin of my belly I grabbed my backbone, and
when I tried to rub my backbone I rubbed the skin of my belly. Due to
eating so little, when I tried to urinate or defecate I fell face down
right there. Due to eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by
rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

Then some people saw me and said: 'The ascetic Gotama is black.' Some
said: 'He's not black, he's brown.' Some said: 'He's neither black nor
brown. The ascetic Gotama has tawny skin.' That's how far the pure,
bright complexion of my skin had been ruined by taking so little food.

Then I thought, 'Whatever ascetics and brahmins have experienced
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion---whether in
the past, future, or present---this is as far as it goes, no-one has
done more than this. But I have not achieved any superhuman distinction
in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones by this severe,
grueling work. Could there be another path to awakening?'

Then it occurred to me, 'I recall sitting in the cool shade of a black
plum tree while my father the Sakyan was off working. Quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered
and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss
born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[835](endnotes.xhtml_note-835){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-835
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Could that be the path to awakening?'

Stemming from that memory came the realization: '*That* is the path to
awakening!'[836](endnotes.xhtml_note-836){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-836
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to me, 'Why am I afraid of that pleasure, for it has
nothing to do with sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities?' Then I
thought, 'I'm not afraid of that pleasure, for it has nothing to do with
sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities.'

Then I thought, 'I can't achieve that pleasure with a body so
excessively emaciated. Why don't I eat some solid food, some rice and
porridge?'[837](endnotes.xhtml_note-837){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-837
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I ate some solid food.

Now at that time the five mendicants were attending on me, thinking,
'The ascetic Gotama will tell us of any truth that he realizes.' But
when I ate some solid food, they left disappointed in me, saying, 'The
ascetic Gotama has become indulgent; he has strayed from the struggle
and returned to indulgence.'

After eating solid food and gathering my strength, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and
remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born
of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. But even
such pleasant feeling did not occupy my mind.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I
entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it connected. But even such pleasant
feeling did not occupy my mind. And with the fading away of rapture, I
entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' But even such pleasant feeling did not occupy my mind. With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. But even such
pleasant feeling did not occupy my mind.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection of past lives. I
recollected my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. But even such pleasant feeling did not occupy my
mind.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. But even such pleasant feeling did not occupy my
mind.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' I truly
understood: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements.'

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it was freed, I
knew it was freed.

I understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.'

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. But even such pleasant feeling did not occupy my
mind.

Aggivessana, I recall teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of many
hundreds,[838](endnotes.xhtml_note-838){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-838
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and each person thought that I was teaching
the Dhamma especially for them. But it should not be seen like this. The
Realized One teaches others only so that they can understand. When that
talk was finished, I stilled, settled, unified, and immersed my mind in
samādhi internally, using the same meditation subject as a basis of
immersion that I used before, which I regularly use to
meditate."[839](endnotes.xhtml_note-839){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-839
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I'd believe that of Mister Gotama, just like a perfected one, a fully
awakened
Buddha.[840](endnotes.xhtml_note-840){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-840
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But do you ever recall sleeping during the
day?"[841](endnotes.xhtml_note-841){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-841
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do recall that in the last month of the summer, I have spread out my
outer robe folded in four and lain down in the lion's posture---on the
right side, placing one foot on top of the other---mindful and aware."

"Some ascetics and brahmins call that a deluded
abiding."[842](endnotes.xhtml_note-842){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-842
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That's not how to define whether someone is deluded or not. But as to
how to define whether someone is deluded or not, listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Saccaka.

The Buddha said this:

"Anyone who has not given up the defilements that are corrupting,
leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future
rebirth, old age, and death is deluded, I say. For it's not giving up
the defilements that makes you deluded. Anyone who has given up the
defilements that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful,
resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death---is not
deluded, I say. For it's giving up the defilements that makes you not
deluded.

The Realized One has given up the defilements that are corrupting,
leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future
rebirth, old age, and death. He has cut them off at the root, made them
like a palm stump, obliterated them so they are unable to arise in the
future. Just as a palm tree with its crown cut off is incapable of
further growth, in the same way, the Realized One has given up the
defilements so they are unable to arise in the future."

When he had spoken, Saccaka said to him, "It's incredible, Mister
Gotama, it's amazing! How when Mister Gotama is repeatedly attacked with
inappropriate and intrusive criticism, the complexion of his skin
brightens and the color of his face becomes clear, just like a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha!

I recall taking on Pūraṇa Kassapa in debate. He dodged the issue,
distracting the discussion with irrelevant points, and displaying
annoyance, hate, and bitterness. But when Mister Gotama is repeatedly
attacked with inappropriate and intrusive criticism, the complexion of
his skin brightens and the color of his face becomes clear, just like a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha.

I recall taking on the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, Ajita of the hair
blanket, Pakudha Kaccāyana, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, and the Jain ascetic
of the Ñātika clan in
debate.[843](endnotes.xhtml_note-843){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-843
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They all dodged the issue, distracting the
discussion with irrelevant points, and displaying annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. But when Mister Gotama is repeatedly attacked with
inappropriate and intrusive criticism, the complexion of his skin
brightens and the color of his face becomes clear, just like a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha.

Well, now, Mister Gotama, I must go. I have many duties, and much to
do."

"Please, Aggivessana, go at your convenience."

Then Saccaka, the son of Jain parents, having approved and agreed with
what the Buddha said, got up from his seat and left.

</article>
<article id="mn37">

### [MN 37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Ending of Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷataṇhāsaṅkhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.

And then Sakka, lord of gods, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one
side, and said to
him:[844](endnotes.xhtml_note-844){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-844
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, how do you briefly define a mendicant who is freed through the
ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate
sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal,
and is best among gods and
humans?"[845](endnotes.xhtml_note-845){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-845
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"lord of gods, take a mendicant who has heard: 'Nothing is worth
insisting
on.'[846](endnotes.xhtml_note-846){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-846
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant has heard that nothing is
worth insisting on, they directly know all things. Directly knowing all
things, they completely understand all things. Completely understanding
all things, when they experience any kind of feeling---pleasant,
unpleasant, or
neutral---[847](endnotes.xhtml_note-847){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-847
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they meditate observing impermanence,
dispassion, cessation, and letting go in those feelings. Meditating in
this way, they don't grasp at anything in the world. Not grasping,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished. They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.' That's how I briefly define a mendicant who is
freed through the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end,
the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans."

Then Sakka, lord of gods, having approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on
his right, before vanishing right there.

Now at that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was sitting not far from the
Buddha. He thought, "Did that spirit comprehend what the Buddha said
when he agreed with him, or
not?[848](endnotes.xhtml_note-848){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-848
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I find out?"

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong person would
extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Eastern Monastery and
reappeared among the gods of the
thirty-three.[849](endnotes.xhtml_note-849){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-849
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now at that time Sakka was amusing himself
in the Single Lotus Park, supplied and provided with a heavenly
orchestra.[850](endnotes.xhtml_note-850){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-850
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Seeing Mahāmoggallāna coming off in the distance, he dismissed the
orchestra, approached Mahāmoggallāna, and said, "Come, my good
Moggallāna! Welcome, good sir! It's been a long time since you took the
opportunity to come here. Sit, my good Moggallāna, this seat is for
you." Mahāmoggallāna sat down on the seat spread out, while Sakka took a
low seat and sat to one side.

Mahāmoggallāna said to him, "Kosiya, how did the Buddha briefly explain
freedom through the ending of
craving?[851](endnotes.xhtml_note-851){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-851
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please share this talk with me so that I
can also get to hear it."

"My good Moggallāna, I have many duties, and much to do, not only for
myself, but also for the gods of the thirty-three. Still, what is
properly heard, learned, attended, and memorized does not vanish all of
a
sudden.[852](endnotes.xhtml_note-852){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-852
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Once upon a time, a battle was fought
between the gods and the
titans.[853](endnotes.xhtml_note-853){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-853
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In that battle the gods won and the titans
lost. When I returned from that battle as a conqueror, I created the
Palace of Victory. The Palace of Victory has a hundred towers. Each
tower has seven hundred chambers. Each chamber has seven nymphs. Each
nymph has seven maids. Would you like to see the lovely Palace of
Victory?" Mahāmoggallāna consented with silence.

Then, putting Venerable Mahāmoggallāna in front, Sakka, lord of gods,
and Vessavaṇa, the Great King, went to the Palace of
Victory.[854](endnotes.xhtml_note-854){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-854
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they saw Moggallāna coming off in the
distance, Sakka's maids, being discreet and prudent, each went to her
own
bedroom.[855](endnotes.xhtml_note-855){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-855
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They were just like a daughter-in-law who
is discreet and prudent when they see their father-in-law.

Then Sakka and Vessavaṇa encouraged Moggallāna to wander and explore the
palace,
saying,[856](endnotes.xhtml_note-856){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-856
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "See, in the palace, my good Moggallāna,
this lovely thing! And that lovely
thing!"[857](endnotes.xhtml_note-857){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-857
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That looks beautiful for the venerable Kosiya, as befits one who has
made merit in the
past.[858](endnotes.xhtml_note-858){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-858
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Humans, when they see something lovely,
also say: 'It looks beautiful enough for the gods of the thirty-three!'
That looks beautiful for the venerable Kosiya, as befits one who has
made merit in the past."

Then Moggallāna thought, "This spirit lives much too negligently. Why
don't I stir up a sense of urgency in him?"

Then Moggallāna used his psychic power to make the Palace of Victory
shake and rock and tremble with his big
toe.[859](endnotes.xhtml_note-859){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-859
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Sakka, Vessavaṇa, and the gods of the
thirty-three, their minds full of wonder and amazement, thought, "Oh,
how incredible, how amazing! The ascetic has such power and might that
he makes the god's home shake and rock and tremble with his big toe!"

Knowing that Sakka was shocked and awestruck, Moggallāna said to him,
"Kosiya, how did the Buddha briefly explain freedom through the ending
of craving? Please share this talk with me so that I can also get to
hear it."

"My dear Moggallāna, I approached the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, 'Sir, how do you briefly define a mendicant who is
freed with the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans?'

When I had spoken the Buddha said to me: 'lord of gods, it's when a
mendicant has heard: "Nothing is worth insisting on" When a mendicant
has heard that nothing is worth insisting on, they directly know all
things. Directly knowing all things, they completely understand all
things. Having completely understood all things, when they experience
any kind of feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they meditate
observing impermanence, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in those
feelings. Meditating in this way, they don't grasp at anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become extinguished. They understand: "Rebirth is ended, the
spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done,
there is nothing further for this place." That's how I briefly define a
mendicant who is freed through the ending of craving, who has reached
the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans.'
That's how the Buddha briefly explained freedom through the ending of
craving to me."

Moggallāna approved and agreed with what Sakka said. As easily as a
strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from among
the gods of the thirty-three and reappeared in the Eastern Monastery.

Soon after Moggallāna left, Sakka's maids said to him, "Good sir, was
that the Blessed One, your Teacher?"

"No, it was not. That was my spiritual companion Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna."[860](endnotes.xhtml_note-860){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-860
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"You're fortunate, good sir, so very fortunate, to have a spiritual
companion of such power and might! We can't believe that's not the
Blessed One, your Teacher!"

Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him, "Sir, do you recall briefly explaining freedom through
the ending of craving to a certain well-known and illustrious
spirit?"[861](endnotes.xhtml_note-861){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-861
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do, Moggallāna." And the Buddha retold all that happened when Sakka
came to visit him, adding:

"That's how I recall briefly explaining freedom through the ending of
craving to Sakka, lord of gods."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn38">

### [MN 38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Ending of Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time a mendicant called Sāti, the fisherman's son, had the
following harmful
misconception:[862](endnotes.xhtml_note-862){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-862
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "As I understand the Buddha's teaching, it
is this very same consciousness that roams and transmigrates, not
another."[863](endnotes.xhtml_note-863){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-863
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Several mendicants heard about this. They went up to Sāti and said to
him, "Is it really true, Reverend Sāti, that you have such a harmful
misconception: 'As I understand the Buddha's teaching, it is this very
same consciousness that roams and transmigrates, not another'?"

"Absolutely, reverends. As I understand the Buddha's teaching, it is
this very same consciousness that roams and transmigrates, not another."

Then, wishing to dissuade Sāti from his view, the mendicants pursued,
pressed, and grilled him, "Don't say that, Sāti! Don't misrepresent the
Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha
would not say that. In many ways the Buddha has said that consciousness
is dependently originated, since without a cause, consciousness does not
come to
be."[864](endnotes.xhtml_note-864){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-864
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But even though the mendicants pressed him in this way, Sāti obstinately
stuck to his misconception and insisted on it.

When they weren't able to dissuade Sāti from his view, the mendicants
went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had
happened.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
the mendicant Sāti that the teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Sāti and said to him,
"Reverend Sāti, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Sāti replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Is it really true, Sāti, that
you have such a harmful misconception: 'As I understand the Buddha's
teaching, it is this very same consciousness that roams and
transmigrates, not another'?"

"Absolutely, sir. As I understand the Buddha's teaching, it is this very
same consciousness that roams and transmigrates, not another."

"Sāti, what is that consciousness?"

"Sir, he is the speaker, the knower who experiences the results of good
and bad deeds in all the different
realms."[865](endnotes.xhtml_note-865){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-865
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Futile man, who on earth have you ever known me to teach in that way?
Haven't I said in many ways that consciousness is dependently
originated, since consciousness does not arise without a cause? But
still you misrepresent me by your wrong grasp, harm yourself, and create
much wickedness. This will be for your lasting harm and suffering."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "What do you think, mendicants?
Has this mendicant Sāti kindled even a spark of ardor in this teaching
and
training?"[866](endnotes.xhtml_note-866){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-866
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How could that be, sir? No, sir." When this was said, Sāti sat silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said, "Futile man, you will be known by your
own harmful misconception. I'll question the mendicants about this."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you understand
my teachings as Sāti does, when he misrepresents me by his wrong grasp,
harms himself, and creates much wickedness?"

"No, sir. For in many ways the Buddha has told us that consciousness is
dependently originated, since without a cause, consciousness does not
come to be."

"Good, good, mendicants! It's good that you understand my teaching like
this. For in many ways I have told you that consciousness is dependently
originated, since without a cause, consciousness does not come to be.
But still this Sāti misrepresents me by his wrong grasp, harms himself,
and creates much wickedness. This will be for his lasting harm and
suffering.

Consciousness is reckoned according to the very same condition dependent
upon which it
arises.[867](endnotes.xhtml_note-867){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-867
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Consciousness that arises dependent on the
eye and sights is reckoned as eye consciousness. Consciousness that
arises dependent on the ear and sounds is reckoned as ear consciousness.
Consciousness that arises dependent on the nose and smells is reckoned
as nose consciousness. Consciousness that arises dependent on the tongue
and tastes is reckoned as tongue consciousness. Consciousness that
arises dependent on the body and touches is reckoned as body
consciousness. Consciousness that arises dependent on the mind and ideas
is reckoned as mind consciousness.

It's like fire, which is reckoned according to the very same condition
dependent upon which it
burns.[868](endnotes.xhtml_note-868){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-868
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A fire that burns dependent on logs is
reckoned as a log fire. A fire that burns dependent on twigs is reckoned
as a twig fire. A fire that burns dependent on grass is reckoned as a
grass fire. A fire that burns dependent on cow-dung is reckoned as a
cow-dung fire. A fire that burns dependent on husks is reckoned as a
husk fire. A fire that burns dependent on rubbish is reckoned as a
rubbish fire.

In the same way, consciousness is reckoned according to the very same
condition dependent upon which it arises. ...

Mendicants, do you see that this has come to
be?"[869](endnotes.xhtml_note-869){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-869
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir."

"Do you see that it originated with that as fuel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you see that when that fuel ceases, what has come to be is liable to
cease?"

"Yes, sir."

"Does doubt arise when you're uncertain whether or not this has come to
be?"

"Yes, sir."

"Does doubt arise when you're uncertain whether or not this has
originated with that as fuel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Does doubt arise when you're uncertain whether or not when that fuel
ceases, what has come to be is liable to cease?"

"Yes, sir."

"Is doubt given up in someone who truly sees with right understanding
that this has come to
be?"[870](endnotes.xhtml_note-870){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-870
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir."

"Is doubt given up in someone who truly sees with right understanding
that this has originated with that as fuel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Is doubt given up in someone who truly sees with right understanding
that when that fuel ceases, what has come to be is liable to cease?"

"Yes, sir."

"Are you free of doubt as to whether this has come to be?"

"Yes, sir."

"Are you free of doubt as to whether this has originated with that as
fuel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Are you free of doubt as to whether when that fuel ceases, what has
come to be is liable to cease?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you truly seen clearly with right understanding that this has come
to be?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you truly seen clearly with right understanding that this has
originated with that as fuel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you truly seen clearly with right understanding that when that
fuel ceases, what has come to be is liable to cease?"

"Yes, sir."

"Pure and bright as this view is, mendicants, if you cherish it, fancy
it, treasure it, and treat it as your own, would you be understanding my
simile of the teaching as a raft: for crossing over, not for holding
on?"[871](endnotes.xhtml_note-871){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-871
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Pure and bright as this view is, mendicants, if you don't cherish it,
fancy it, treasure it, and treat it as your own, would you be
understanding my simile of the teaching as a raft: for crossing over,
not for holding on?"

"Yes, sir."

"Mendicants, there are these four fuels. They maintain sentient beings
that have been born and help those that are about to be born. What four?
Solid food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental
intention the third, and consciousness the
fourth.[872](endnotes.xhtml_note-872){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-872
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of these four
fuels?[873](endnotes.xhtml_note-873){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-873
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Craving.

And what is the source of craving? Feeling.

And what is the source of feeling? Contact.

And what is the source of contact? The six sense fields.

And what is the source of the six sense fields? Name and form.

And what is the source of name and form? Consciousness.

And what is the source of consciousness? Choices.

And what is the source of choices? Ignorance.

So, ignorance is a condition for
choices.[874](endnotes.xhtml_note-874){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-874
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Choices are a condition for
consciousness.[875](endnotes.xhtml_note-875){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-875
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Consciousness is a condition for name and
form.[876](endnotes.xhtml_note-876){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-876
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Name and form are conditions for the six
sense
fields.[877](endnotes.xhtml_note-877){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-877
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The six sense fields are conditions for
contact.[878](endnotes.xhtml_note-878){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-878
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Contact is a condition for
feeling.[879](endnotes.xhtml_note-879){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-879
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Feeling is a condition for
craving.[880](endnotes.xhtml_note-880){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-880
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Craving is a condition for
grasping.[881](endnotes.xhtml_note-881){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-881
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Grasping is a condition for continued
existence.[882](endnotes.xhtml_note-882){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-882
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Continued existence is a condition for
rebirth.[883](endnotes.xhtml_note-883){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-883
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rebirth is a condition for old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to
be.[884](endnotes.xhtml_note-884){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-884
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.

'Rebirth is a condition for old age and death.' That's what I
said.[885](endnotes.xhtml_note-885){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-885
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Is that how you see this or not?"

"That's how we see it."

"'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.' ...

'Ignorance is a condition for choices.' That's what I said. Is that how
you see this or not?"

"That's how we see it."

"Good, mendicants! So both you and I say this. When this exists, that
is; due to the arising of this, that arises. That
is:[886](endnotes.xhtml_note-886){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-886
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ignorance is a condition for choices.
Choices are a condition for consciousness. Consciousness is a condition
for name and form. Name and form are conditions for the six sense
fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact. Contact is a
condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a
condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence.
Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition
for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress
to come to be. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices
cease. When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness
ceases, name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense
fields cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When
contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases.
When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

'When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease.' That's what I said. Is
that how you see this or not?"

"That's how we see it."

'When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.' ...

'When ignorance ceases, choices cease.' That's what I said. Is that how
you see this or not?"

"That's how we see it."

"Good, mendicants! So both you and I say this. When this doesn't exist,
that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: When
ignorance ceases, choices cease. When choices cease, consciousness
ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and
form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease,
contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling
ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When
grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence
ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases.

Knowing and seeing in this way, mendicants, would you turn back to the
past,
thinking,[887](endnotes.xhtml_note-887){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-887
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Did we exist in the past? Did we not exist
in the past? What were we in the past? How were we in the past? After
being what, what did we become in the
past?'?"[888](endnotes.xhtml_note-888){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-888
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, mendicants, would you turn forward to
the future,
thinking,[889](endnotes.xhtml_note-889){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-889
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Will we exist in the future? Will we not
exist in the future? What will we be in the future? How will we be in
the future? After being what, what will we become in the future?'?"

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, mendicants, would you be undecided
about the present, thinking, 'Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? This
sentient being---where did it come from? And where will it
go?'?"[890](endnotes.xhtml_note-890){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-890
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, would you say, 'Our teacher is
respected. We speak like this out of respect for our
teacher'?"[891](endnotes.xhtml_note-891){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-891
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, would you say, 'Our ascetic says this.
We speak like this because it is what he
says'?"[892](endnotes.xhtml_note-892){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-892
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, would you dedicate yourself to another
teacher?"

"No, sir."

"Knowing and seeing in this way, would you believe that the observances
and boisterous, superstitious rites of the various ascetics and brahmins
are
essential?"[893](endnotes.xhtml_note-893){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-893
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Aren't you speaking only of what you have known and seen and realized
for yourselves?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! You have been guided by me with this teaching that's
apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. For when I said that this teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves, this is what I was
referring to.

Mendicants, when three things come together an embryo is
conceived.[894](endnotes.xhtml_note-894){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-894
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In a case where the mother and father come
together, but the mother is not in the fertile phase of her menstrual
cycle, and the virile spirit is not ready, the embryo is not
conceived.[895](endnotes.xhtml_note-895){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-895
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In a case where the mother and father come
together, the mother is in the fertile phase of her menstrual cycle, but
the virile spirit is not ready, the embryo is not conceived. But when
these three things come together---the mother and father come together,
the mother is in the fertile phase of her menstrual cycle, and the
virile spirit is ready---an embryo is conceived.

The mother nurtures the embryo in her womb for nine or ten months at
great risk to her heavy
burden.[896](endnotes.xhtml_note-896){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-896
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When nine or ten months have passed, the
mother gives birth at great risk to her heavy burden. When the infant is
born she nourishes it with her own blood. For mother's milk is regarded
as blood in the training of the Noble
One.[897](endnotes.xhtml_note-897){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-897
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That boy grows up and his faculties
mature.[898](endnotes.xhtml_note-898){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-898
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He accordingly plays childish games such as
toy plows, tipcat, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, and
toy
bows.[899](endnotes.xhtml_note-899){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-899
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That boy grows up and his faculties mature further. He accordingly
amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and
arousing.[900](endnotes.xhtml_note-900){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-900
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Sounds known by the ear ...

Smells known by the nose ...

Tastes known by the tongue ...

Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

When they see a sight with their eyes, if it's pleasant they desire it,
but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of
the body unestablished and their heart
restricted.[901](endnotes.xhtml_note-901){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-901
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they don't truly understand the freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful
qualities cease without anything left over.

Being so full of favoring and opposing, when they experience any kind of
feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they approve, welcome, and
keep clinging to it. This gives rise to relishing. Relishing feelings is
grasping. Their grasping is a condition for continued existence.
Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition
for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress
to come to
be.[902](endnotes.xhtml_note-902){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-902
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, if it's pleasant they desire it,
but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of
the body unestablished and their heart restricted. And they don't truly
understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen
bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

Being so full of favoring and opposing, when they experience any kind of
feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they approve, welcome, and
keep clinging to it. This gives rise to relishing. Relishing feelings is
grasping. Their grasping is a condition for continued existence.
Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition
for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress
to come to be. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

But consider when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened,
blessed.[903](endnotes.xhtml_note-903){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-903
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. He reveals
an entirely full and pure spiritual life.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect, 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to
homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving.

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of sex.

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and trustworthy, and don't trick the world with their words.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They avoid injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They avoid
seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They avoid beautifying and
adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. They avoid
high and luxurious beds. They avoid receiving gold and currency, raw
grains, raw meat, women and girls, male and female bondservants, goats
and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and
fields and land. They avoid running errands and messages; buying and
selling; falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud,
cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry,
plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they have this noble
sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving
up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. Furthermore, as the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in
the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When they see a sight with their eyes, if it's pleasant they don't
desire it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless
heart.[904](endnotes.xhtml_note-904){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-904
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they truly understand the freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities
cease without anything left over.

Having given up favoring and opposing, when they experience any kind of
feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they don't approve,
welcome, or keep clinging to it. As a result, relishing of feelings
ceases. When their relishing ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping
ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases,
rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, if it's pleasant they don't
desire it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And they
truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those
arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

Having given up favoring and opposing, when they experience any kind of
feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they don't approve,
welcome, or keep clinging to it. As a result, relishing of feelings
ceases. When their relishing ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping
ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases,
rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases.

Mendicants, you should memorize this brief statement on freedom through
the ending of craving. But the mendicant Sāti, the fisherman's son, is
caught in a vast net of craving, a tangle of
craving."[905](endnotes.xhtml_note-905){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-905
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn39">

### [MN 39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse at Assapura ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāassapurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town named
Assapura.[906](endnotes.xhtml_note-906){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-906
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, people label you as ascetics. And when they ask you what
you are, you claim to be
ascetics.[907](endnotes.xhtml_note-907){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-907
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Given this label and this claim, you should train like this: 'We will
undertake and follow the things that make one an ascetic and a brahmin.
That way our label will be accurate and our claim correct. Any robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick that we use
will be very fruitful and beneficial for the donor. And our going forth
will not be wasted, but will be fruitful and fertile.'

And what are the things that make one an ascetic and a brahmin? You
should train like this: 'We will have conscience and prudence.' Now,
mendicants, you might think, 'We have conscience and prudence. This is
sufficient; enough has been done. We have achieved the goal of life as
an ascetic. There is nothing more to do.' And you might rest content
with just that much. I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this
to you: 'You who seek to be true ascetics, do not lose sight of the goal
of the ascetic life while there is still more to do.'

What more is there to do? You should train like this: 'Our bodily
behavior will be pure, clear, open, neither inconsistent nor
secretive.[908](endnotes.xhtml_note-908){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-908
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And we won't glorify ourselves or put
others down on account of our pure bodily behavior.' Now, mendicants,
you might think, 'We have conscience and prudence, and our bodily
behavior is pure. This is sufficient ...' I declare this to you,
mendicants, I announce this to you: 'You who seek to be true ascetics,
do not lose sight of the goal of the ascetic life while there is still
more to do.'

What more is there to do? You should train like this: 'Our verbal
behavior ... mental behavior ... livelihood will be pure, clear, open,
neither inconsistent nor secretive. And we won't glorify ourselves or
put others down on account of our pure livelihood.' Now, mendicants, you
might think, 'We have conscience and prudence, our bodily, verbal, and
mental behavior is pure, and our livelihood is pure. This is sufficient;
enough has been done. We have achieved the goal of life as an ascetic.
There is nothing more to do.' And you might rest content with just that
much. I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you: 'You
who seek to be true ascetics, do not lose sight of the goal of the
ascetic life while there is still more to do.'

What more is there to do? You should train yourselves like this: 'We
will restrain our sense doors. When we see a sight with our eyes, we
won't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of sight
were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, we will practice
restraint, we will protect the faculty of sight, and we will achieve its
restraint. When we hear a sound with our ears ... When we smell an odor
with our nose ... When we taste a flavor with our tongue ... When we
feel a touch with our body ... When we know an idea with our mind, we
won't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind
were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, we will practice
restraint, we will protect the faculty of mind, and we will achieve its
restraint.' Now, mendicants, you might think, 'We have conscience and
prudence, our bodily, verbal, and mental behavior is pure, our
livelihood is pure, and our sense doors are restrained. This is
sufficient ...'

What more is there to do? You should train yourselves like this: 'We
will not eat too much. We will only eat after reflecting rationally on
our food. We will eat not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration,
but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual
practice. In this way, we shall put an end to old discomfort and not
give rise to new discomfort, and we will have the means to keep going,
blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' Now, mendicants, you might
think, 'We have conscience and prudence, our bodily, verbal, and mental
behavior is pure, our livelihood is pure, our sense doors are
restrained, and we don't eat too much. This is sufficient ...'

What more is there to do? You should train yourselves like this: 'We
will be dedicated to wakefulness. When practicing walking and sitting
meditation by day, we will purify our mind from obstacles. In the first
watch of the night, we will continue to practice walking and sitting
meditation. In the middle watch, we will lie down in the lion's
posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top of the
other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. In the
last watch, we will get up and continue to practice walking and sitting
meditation, purifying our mind from obstacles.' Now, mendicants, you
might think, 'We have conscience and prudence, our bodily, verbal, and
mental behavior is pure, our livelihood is pure, our sense doors are
restrained, we don't eat too much, and we are dedicated to wakefulness.
This is sufficient ...'

What more is there to do? You should train yourselves like this: 'We
will have situational awareness and mindfulness. We will act with
situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead
and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer
robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when
urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping,
waking, speaking, and keeping silent.' Now, mendicants, you might think,
'We have conscience and prudence, our bodily, verbal, and mental
behavior is pure, our livelihood is pure, our sense doors are
restrained, we don't eat too much, we are dedicated to wakefulness, and
we have mindfulness and situational awareness. This is sufficient ...'

What more is there to do? Take a mendicant who frequents a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving
up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to
work,[909](endnotes.xhtml_note-909){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-909
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and his efforts proved successful. He would
pay off the original loan and have enough left over to support his
partner. Thinking about this, he'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was sick, suffering, and gravely ill. They'd lose their
appetite and get physically weak. But after some time they'd recover
from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength.
Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. But after some time they were
released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. Thinking
about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master,
but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. But after some
time they'd be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not
indentured to another, an emancipated individual able to go where they
wish. Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling
along a desert road. But after some time they crossed over the desert,
safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. Thinking about this, they'd be
filled with joy and happiness.

In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up
inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a
prison, slavery, and a desert crossing. But when these five hindrances
are given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards this as freedom from
debt, good health, release from prison, emancipation, and a place of
sanctuary at last.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread
their body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of
the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion.[910](endnotes.xhtml_note-910){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-910
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or
their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it
little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder
is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out;
yet no moisture oozes
out.[911](endnotes.xhtml_note-911){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-911
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born
of immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of
cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads
throughout the lake. There's no part of the lake that's not spread
through with cool
water.[912](endnotes.xhtml_note-912){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-912
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture. It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white
lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above
it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched,
steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them
that's not soaked with cool
water.[913](endnotes.xhtml_note-913){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-913
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with bliss free of rapture. There's no part of the body that's not
spread with bliss free of rapture.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They sit
spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of
the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. It's like someone
sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There's no part of
the body that's not spread over with white
cloth.[914](endnotes.xhtml_note-914){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-914
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright
mind. There's no part of the body that's not spread with pure bright
mind.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details. Suppose a
person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From
that village they'd go to yet another village. And from that village
they'd return to their home village. They'd think: 'I went from my home
village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that,
spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to
yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke
like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to
my home village.'

In the same way, a mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives,
with features and details.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
Suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with clear eyes
standing in between them would see people entering and leaving a house
and wandering to and fro.

In the same way, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements.' Knowing and seeing
like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they know
they're freed. They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.'

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent,
clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank
would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of
fish swimming about or staying still. They'd think: 'This lake is
transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels,
and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying
still.'

In the same way, a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'

This mendicant is one who is called an 'ascetic', a 'brahmin', a 'bathed
initiate', a 'knowledge master', a 'scholar', a 'noble one', and also a
'perfected
one'.[915](endnotes.xhtml_note-915){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-915
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how is a mendicant an
ascetic?[916](endnotes.xhtml_note-916){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-916
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have assuaged the bad, unskillful
qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful,
resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. That's
how a mendicant is an ascetic.

And how is a mendicant a
brahmin?[917](endnotes.xhtml_note-917){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-917
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have banished the bad, unskillful
qualities. That's how a mendicant is a brahmin.

And how is a mendicant a bathed
initiate?[918](endnotes.xhtml_note-918){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-918
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have bathed off the bad, unskillful
qualities. That's how a mendicant is a bathed initiate.

And how is a mendicant a knowledge
master?[919](endnotes.xhtml_note-919){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-919
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have known the bad, unskillful
qualities. That's how a mendicant is a knowledge master.

And how is a mendicant a
scholar?[920](endnotes.xhtml_note-920){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-920
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have scoured off the bad, unskillful
qualities. That's how a mendicant is a scholar.

And how is a mendicant a noble
one?[921](endnotes.xhtml_note-921){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-921
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They have nobbled their foes, the bad,
unskillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is a noble one.

And how is a mendicant a perfected
one?[922](endnotes.xhtml_note-922){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-922
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They are impeccably remote from the bad,
unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives,
hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death.
That's how a mendicant is a perfected one."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn40">

### [MN 40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse at Assapura ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷaassapurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[923](endnotes.xhtml_note-923){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-923
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town named Assapura. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, people label you as ascetics. And when they ask you what
you are, you claim to be ascetics.

Given this label and this claim, you should train like this: 'We will
practice in the way that is proper for an ascetic. That way our label
will be accurate and our claim correct. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings,
and medicines and supplies for the sick that we use will be very
fruitful and beneficial for the donor. And our going forth will not be
wasted, but will be fruitful and fertile.'

And how does a mendicant not practice in the way that is proper for an
ascetic?[924](endnotes.xhtml_note-924){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-924
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Any mendicant who has not given up covetousness, ill will, irritability,
acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit,
corrupt wishes, and wrong
view[925](endnotes.xhtml_note-925){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-925
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} is not practicing in the way that is proper
for an ascetic, I say. And that is due to not giving up these stains,
defects, and dregs of an ascetic, these grounds for rebirth in places of
loss, to be experienced in bad places. I say that such a mendicant's
going forth may be compared to the kind of weapon called
'deadborn'---double-edged, whetted with yellow arsenic---that has been
covered and wrapped in an outer
robe.[926](endnotes.xhtml_note-926){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-926
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I say that you don't deserve the label 'outer robe wearer' just because
you wear an outer robe. You don't deserve the label 'naked ascetic' just
because you go naked. You don't deserve the label 'dust and dirt wearer'
just because you're caked in dust and
dirt.[927](endnotes.xhtml_note-927){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-927
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You don't deserve the label 'water
immerser' just because you immerse yourself in water. You don't deserve
the label 'tree root dweller' just because you stay at the root of a
tree. You don't deserve the label 'open air dweller' just because you
stay in the open air. You don't deserve the label 'stander' just because
you continually stand. You don't deserve the label 'interval eater' just
because you eat food at set intervals. You don't deserve the label
'reciter' just because you recite hymns. You don't deserve the label
'matted-hair ascetic' just because you have matted hair.

Imagine that just by wearing an outer robe someone with covetousness,
ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy,
stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view could
give up these things. If that were the case, your friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin would make you an outer robe wearer as
soon as you were born. They'd encourage you: 'Please, dearest, wear an
outer robe! By doing so you will give up covetousness, ill will,
irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess,
deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong
view.'[928](endnotes.xhtml_note-928){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-928
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But sometimes I see someone with these bad
qualities who is an outer robe wearer. That's why I say that you don't
deserve the label 'outer robe wearer' just because you wear an outer
robe.

Imagine that just by going naked ... wearing dust and dirt ... immersing
in water ... staying at the root of a tree ... staying in the open air
... standing continually ... eating at set intervals ... reciting hymns
... having matted hair someone with covetousness, ill will,
irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess,
deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view could give up these
things. If that were the case, your friends and colleagues, relatives
and kin would make you a matted-hair ascetic as soon as you were born.
They'd encourage you: 'Please, dearest, become a matted-hair ascetic! By
doing so you will give up covetousness, ill will, irritability,
hostility, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit,
corrupt wishes, and wrong view.' But sometimes I see someone with these
bad qualities who is a matted-hair ascetic. That's why I say that you
don't deserve the label 'matted-hair ascetic' just because you have
matted hair.

And how does a mendicant practice in the way that is proper for an
ascetic?

Any mendicant who has given up covetousness, ill will, irritability,
acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit,
corrupt wishes, and wrong view is practicing in the way that is proper
for an ascetic, I say. And that is due to giving up these stains,
defects, and dregs of an ascetic, these grounds for rebirth in places of
loss, to be experienced in bad places.

They see themselves purified from all these bad, unskillful qualities.
Seeing this, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi.

They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean,
with smooth banks, delightful. Then along comes a person---whether from
the east, west, north, or south---struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. No matter what direction they come from,
when they arrive at that lotus pond they would alleviate their thirst
and heat
exhaustion.[929](endnotes.xhtml_note-929){#mn-mahayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-929
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, suppose someone has gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness---whether from a family of aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,
or menials---and has arrived at the teaching and training proclaimed by
a Realized One. Having developed love, compassion, rejoicing, and
equanimity in this way they gain inner peace. Because of that inner
peace they are practicing the way proper for an ascetic, I say.

And suppose someone has gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness---whether from a family of aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,
or workers---and they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements. They're an ascetic because
of the ending of defilements."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml}

## The Lesser Chapter on Pairs {#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_mn-culayamakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn41">

### [MN 41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The People of Sālā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāleyyakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Sālā.[930](endnotes.xhtml_note-930){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-930
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard, "It seems the ascetic
Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---while wandering in
the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large
Saṅgha of mendicants. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. He reveals an entirely full and pure spiritual life. It's
good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before
sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and
polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha,
some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to
one side they said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell?[931](endnotes.xhtml_note-931){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-931
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what
is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. Principled and moral conduct is
the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"We don't understand the detailed meaning of Mister Gotama's brief
statement. Mister Gotama, please teach us this matter in detail so we
can understand the meaning."

"Well then, householders, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Householders, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of
body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of
mind.[932](endnotes.xhtml_note-932){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-932
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body?
It's when a certain person kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living
beings.[933](endnotes.xhtml_note-933){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-933
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who
have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman
who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation
is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.[934](endnotes.xhtml_note-934){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-934
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how unprincipled and immoral
conduct is threefold by way of body.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech?
It's when a certain person lies. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for
the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly
reason.[935](endnotes.xhtml_note-935){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-935
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor
beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training.
Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and
pointless. This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by
way of speech.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of
mind?[936](endnotes.xhtml_note-936){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-936
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It\'s when a certain person is covetous.
They covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh, if only their
belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'[937](endnotes.xhtml_note-937){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-937
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is how unprincipled and immoral
conduct is threefold by way of mind.

That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

Householders, principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body,
fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? It's
when a certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce
the rod and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of
sympathy for all living beings.

They give up stealing. They don't, with the intention to commit theft,
take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sexual relations with
women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother,
sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sexual relations
with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or
whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded
as a token of betrothal. This is how principled and moral conduct is
threefold by way of body.

And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? It's
when a certain person gives up lying. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I don't know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
don't see.' And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they don't deliberately lie
for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly
reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable
to the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
This is how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? It\'s
when a certain person is not covetous. They don't covet the wealth and
belongings of others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.' This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way
of mind.

This is how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm.

A person of principled and moral conduct might wish: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of
well-to-do
aristocrats!'[938](endnotes.xhtml_note-938){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-938
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's possible that this might happen. Why
is that? Because they have principled and moral conduct.

A person of principled and moral conduct might wish: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of
well-to-do brahmins ... well-to-do householders ... the gods of the four
great kings ... the gods of the thirty-three ... the gods of Yama ...
the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ... the gods who
control what is imagined by others ... the gods of Brahmā's host
...[939](endnotes.xhtml_note-939){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-939
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the radiant gods
...[940](endnotes.xhtml_note-940){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-940
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of limited radiance ... the gods
of limitless radiance ... the gods of streaming radiance ... the gods of
limited beauty
...[941](endnotes.xhtml_note-941){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-941
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of limitless beauty ... the gods
of universal beauty ... the gods of abundant fruit
...[942](endnotes.xhtml_note-942){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-942
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of Aviha
...[943](endnotes.xhtml_note-943){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-943
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of Atappa ... the gods fair to see
... the fair seeing gods ... the gods of Akaniṭṭha ... the gods of the
dimension of infinite space
...[944](endnotes.xhtml_note-944){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-944
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the gods of the dimension of infinite
consciousness ... the gods of the dimension of nothingness ... the gods
of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.' It's
possible that this might happen. Why is that? Because they have
principled and moral conduct.

A person of principled and moral conduct might wish: 'If only I might
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the
ending of defilements.' It's possible that this might happen. Why is
that? Because they have principled and moral conduct."

When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the
Buddha, "Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us as lay
followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn42">

### [MN 42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The People of Verañjā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Verañjakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[945](endnotes.xhtml_note-945){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-945
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the brahmins and householders of Verañjā were residing
in Sāvatthī on some
business.[946](endnotes.xhtml_note-946){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-946
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The brahmins and householders of Verañjā
heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---is staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. He has this good reputation ... It's good to see such
perfected ones."

... They said to the Buddha: "What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is
the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?
And what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. Principled and moral conduct is
the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"We don't understand the detailed meaning of Mister Gotama's brief
statement. ..."

"Householders, a person of unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold
by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.
..." ...

</article>
<article id="mn43">

### [MN 43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Elaboration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāvedallasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[947](endnotes.xhtml_note-947){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-947
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat,
went to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend, they speak of 'a witless person'. How is a witless person
defined?"

"Reverend, they're called witless because they don't understand. And
what don't they understand? They don't understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' They're called witless because they don't understand."

Saying "Good, reverend," Mahākoṭṭhita approved and agreed with what
Sāriputta said. Then he asked another question:

"They speak of 'a wise person'. How is a wise person defined?"

"They're called wise because they understand. And what do they
understand? They understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin
of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' They're called wise
because they understand."

"They speak of 'consciousness'. How is consciousness defined?"

"It's called consciousness because it
cognizes.[948](endnotes.xhtml_note-948){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-948
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what does it cognize? It cognizes
'pleasure' and 'pain' and
'neutral'.[949](endnotes.xhtml_note-949){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-949
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's called consciousness because it
cognizes."

"Wisdom and consciousness---are these things mixed or separate? And can
we completely disentangle them so as to describe the difference between
them?"[950](endnotes.xhtml_note-950){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-950
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Wisdom and
consciousness---[951](endnotes.xhtml_note-951){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-951
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} these things are mixed, not separate. And
you can never completely disentangle them so as to describe the
difference between them. For you understand what you cognize, and you
cognize what you understand. That's why these things are mixed, not
separate. And you can never completely disentangle them so as to
describe the difference between
them."[952](endnotes.xhtml_note-952){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-952
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Wisdom and consciousness---what is the difference between these things
that are mixed, not separate?"

"The difference between these things is that wisdom should be developed,
while consciousness should be completely
understood."[953](endnotes.xhtml_note-953){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-953
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"They speak of this thing called 'feeling'. How is feeling defined?"

"It's called feeling because it feels. And what does it feel? It feels
pleasure, pain, and
neutral.[954](endnotes.xhtml_note-954){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-954
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's called feeling because it feels."

"They speak of this thing called 'perception'. How is perception
defined?"

"It's called perception because it perceives. And what does it perceive?
It perceives blue, yellow, red, and
white.[955](endnotes.xhtml_note-955){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-955
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's called perception because it
perceives."

"Feeling, perception, and consciousness---are these things mixed or
separate? And can we completely disentangle them so as to describe the
difference between them?"

"Feeling, perception, and consciousness---these things are mixed, not
separate. And you can never completely disentangle them so as to
describe the difference between them. For you perceive what you feel,
and you cognize what you perceive. That's why these things are mixed,
not separate. And you can never completely disentangle them so as to
describe the difference between them."

"What can be known by purified mind consciousness released from the five
senses?"[956](endnotes.xhtml_note-956){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-956
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Aware that 'space is infinite' it can know the dimension of infinite
space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite' it can know the dimension
of infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all' it can
know the dimension of nothingness."

"How do you understand something that can be known?"

"You understand something that can be known with the eye of
wisdom."[957](endnotes.xhtml_note-957){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-957
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What is the purpose of wisdom?"

"The purpose of wisdom is direct knowledge, complete understanding, and
giving
up."[958](endnotes.xhtml_note-958){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-958
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How many conditions are there for the arising of right
view?"[959](endnotes.xhtml_note-959){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-959
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are two conditions for the arising of right view: the voice of
another and rational application of
mind.[960](endnotes.xhtml_note-960){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-960
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the two conditions for the
arising of right view."

"When right view is supported by how many factors does it have freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and
benefit?"[961](endnotes.xhtml_note-961){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-961
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"When right view is supported by five factors it has freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and benefit. It's when right view is
supported by ethics, learning, discussion, serenity, and discernment.
When right view is supported by these five factors it has freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and benefit."

"How many states of existence are there?"

"Reverend, there are these three states of
existence.[962](endnotes.xhtml_note-962){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-962
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Existence in the sensual realm, the realm
of luminous form, and the formless realm."

"But how is there rebirth into a new state of existence in the future?"

"It's because of sentient beings---shrouded by ignorance and fettered by
craving---taking pleasure wherever they
land.[963](endnotes.xhtml_note-963){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-963
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how there is rebirth into a new
state of existence in the future."

"But how is there no rebirth into a new state of existence in the
future?"

"It's when ignorance fades away, knowledge arises, and craving ceases.
That's how there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the
future."

"But what, reverend, is the first absorption?"

"Reverend, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is called the first
absorption."

"But how many factors does the first absorption have?"

"The first absorption has five factors. When a mendicant has entered the
first absorption, placing the mind, keeping it connected, rapture,
bliss, and unification of mind are
present.[964](endnotes.xhtml_note-964){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-964
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how the first absorption has five
factors."

"But how many factors has the first absorption given up and how many
does it possess?"

"The first absorption has given up five factors and possesses five
factors. When a mendicant has entered the first absorption, sensual
desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and
doubt are given up. Placing the mind, keeping it connected, rapture,
bliss, and unification of mind are
present.[965](endnotes.xhtml_note-965){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-965
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how the first absorption has given
up five factors and possesses five factors."

"Reverend, these five faculties have different scopes and different
ranges, and don't experience each others' scope and range. That
is,[966](endnotes.xhtml_note-966){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-966
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the faculties of the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, and body. What do these five faculties, with their different
scopes and ranges, have recourse to? What experiences their scopes and
ranges?"

"These five faculties, with their different scopes and ranges, have
recourse to the mind. And the mind experiences their scopes and
ranges."[967](endnotes.xhtml_note-967){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-967
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"These five faculties depend on what to continue?"

"These five faculties depend on vitality to continue."

"But what does vitality depend on to continue?"

"Vitality depends on warmth to continue."

"But what does warmth depend on to continue?"

"Warmth depends on vitality to continue."

"Just now I understood you to say: 'Vitality depends on warmth to
continue.' But I also understood you to say: 'Warmth depends on vitality
to continue.' How then should we see the meaning of this statement?"

"Well then, reverend, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose there was an oil lamp burning. The light appears dependent on
the flame, and the flame appears dependent on the light. In the same
way, vitality depends on warmth to continue, and warmth depends on
vitality to continue."

"Are the vital forces the same things as the phenomena that are felt? Or
are they different
things?"[968](endnotes.xhtml_note-968){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-968
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The vital forces are not the same things as the phenomena that are
felt. For if the vital forces and the phenomena that are felt were the
same things, a mendicant who had attained the cessation of perception
and feeling would not emerge from
it.[969](endnotes.xhtml_note-969){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-969
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But because the vital forces and the
phenomena that are felt are different things, a mendicant who has
attained the cessation of perception and feeling can emerge from it."

"How many things must this body lose before it lies forsaken, tossed
aside like an insentient log?"

"This body must lose three things before it lies forsaken, tossed aside
like an insentient log: vitality, warmth, and
consciousness."[970](endnotes.xhtml_note-970){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-970
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What's the difference between someone who has passed away and a
mendicant who has attained the cessation of perception and
feeling?"[971](endnotes.xhtml_note-971){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-971
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"When someone dies, their physical, verbal, and mental processes have
ceased and stilled; their vitality is spent; their warmth is dissipated;
and their faculties have
disintegrated.[972](endnotes.xhtml_note-972){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-972
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant has attained the cessation
of perception and feeling, their physical, verbal, and mental processes
have ceased and stilled. But their vitality is not spent; their warmth
is not dissipated; and their faculties are very clear. That's the
difference between someone who has passed away and a mendicant who has
attained the cessation of perception and feeling."

"How many conditions are necessary to attain the neutral release of the
heart?"

"Four conditions are necessary to attain the neutral release of the
heart. Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. These
four conditions are necessary to attain the neutral release of the
heart."

"How many conditions are necessary to attain the signless release of the
heart?"

"Two conditions are necessary to attain the signless release of the
heart: not focusing on any signs, and focusing on the signless. These
two conditions are necessary to attain the signless release of the
heart."

"How many conditions are necessary to remain in the signless release of
the heart?"

"Three conditions are necessary to remain in the signless release of the
heart: not focusing on any signs, focusing on the signless, and a
previous
determination.[973](endnotes.xhtml_note-973){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-973
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These three conditions are necessary to
remain in the signless release of the heart."

"How many conditions are necessary to emerge from the signless release
of the heart?"

"Two conditions are necessary to emerge from the signless release of the
heart: focusing on all signs, and not focusing on the signless. These
two conditions are necessary to emerge from the signless release of the
heart."

"The limitless release of the heart, and the release of the heart
through nothingness, and the release of the heart through emptiness, and
the signless release of the heart: do these things differ in both
meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ only in
the phrasing?"

"There is a way in which these things differ in both meaning and
phrasing. But there's also a way in which they mean the same thing, and
differ only in the
phrasing.[974](endnotes.xhtml_note-974){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-974
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what's the way in which these things differ in both meaning and
phrasing?

Firstly, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion ... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...
They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will. This is called the limitless release of the
heart.

And what is the release of the heart through nothingness? It's when a
mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness,
aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains in the
dimension of nothingness. This is called the heart's release through
nothingness.

And what is the release of the heart through emptiness? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'This is empty of a self or what
belongs to a self.' This is called the release of the heart through
emptiness.

And what is the signless release of the heart? It's when a mendicant,
not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in the signless immersion
of the heart. This is called the signless release of the heart.

This is the way in which these things differ in both meaning and
phrasing.

And what's the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in
the phrasing?

Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of limits. A mendicant who has
ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made
them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to
arise in the future. The unshakable release of the heart is said to be
the best kind of limitless release of the heart. That unshakable release
of the heart is empty of greed, hate, and delusion.

Greed is something, hate is something, and delusion is something. A
mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off
at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they
are unable to arise in the future. The unshakable release of the heart
is said to be the best kind of release of the heart through nothingness.
That unshakable release of the heart is empty of greed, hate, and
delusion.

Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of signs. A mendicant who has ended
the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them
like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in
the future. The unshakable release of the heart is said to be the best
kind of signless release of the heart. That unshakable release of the
heart is empty of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in
the phrasing."

This is what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita
approved what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="mn44">

### [MN 44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Elaboration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷavedallasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then the layman Visākha went to see the nun Dhammadinnā, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to
her:[975](endnotes.xhtml_note-975){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-975
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Ma'am, they speak of this thing called 'substantial
reality'.[976](endnotes.xhtml_note-976){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-976
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What is this substantial reality that the
Buddha spoke of?"

"Visākha, the Buddha said that these five grasping aggregates are
substantial
reality.[977](endnotes.xhtml_note-977){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-977
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is, the grasping aggregates of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. The Buddha said that
these five grasping aggregates are substantial reality."

Saying "Good, ma'am," Visākha approved and agreed with what Dhammadinnā
said. Then he asked another question:

"Ma'am, they speak of this thing called 'the origin of substantial
reality'. What is the origin of substantial reality that the Buddha
spoke of?"

"It's the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing
and greed, taking pleasure wherever it lands. That
is,[978](endnotes.xhtml_note-978){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-978
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} craving for sensual pleasures, craving to
continue existence, and craving to end existence. The Buddha said that
this is the origin of substantial reality."

"Ma'am, they speak of this thing called 'the cessation of substantial
reality'. What is the cessation of substantial reality that the Buddha
spoke of?"

"It's the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with
nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not
clinging to it. The Buddha said that this is the cessation of
substantial reality."

"Ma'am, they speak of the practice that leads to the cessation of
substantial reality. What is the practice that leads to the cessation of
substantial reality that the Buddha spoke of?"

"The practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality that
the Buddha spoke of is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion."

"But ma'am, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping
aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates
another?"

"That grasping is not the exact same thing as the five grasping
aggregates. Nor is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates
another. The desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates is the
grasping
there."[979](endnotes.xhtml_note-979){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-979
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, how does substantialist view come about?"

"It's when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and
is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the true persons. They regard form as self, self as
having form, form in self, or self in
form.[980](endnotes.xhtml_note-980){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-980
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They regard feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's how
substantialist view comes about."

"But ma'am, how does substantialist view not come about?"

"It's when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is
skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true
persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true
persons. They don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in
self, or self in form. They don't regard feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's how
substantialist view does not come about."

"But ma'am, what is the noble eightfold path?"

"It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion."

"But ma'am, is the noble eightfold path conditioned or unconditioned?"

"The noble eightfold path is conditioned."

"Are the three spectrums of practice included in the noble eightfold
path? Or is the noble eightfold path included in the three practice
categories?"[981](endnotes.xhtml_note-981){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-981
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The three spectrums of practice are not included in the noble eightfold
path. Rather, the noble eightfold path is included in the three practice
categories.[982](endnotes.xhtml_note-982){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-982
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Right speech, right action, and right
livelihood: these things are included in the spectrum of ethics. Right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion: these things are
included in the spectrum of immersion. Right view and right thought:
these things are included in the spectrum of wisdom."

"But ma'am, what is immersion? What things are the bases of immersion?
What things are the prerequisites for immersion? What is the development
of immersion?"

"Unification of the mind is
immersion.[983](endnotes.xhtml_note-983){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-983
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are the bases for
immersion.[984](endnotes.xhtml_note-984){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-984
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The four right efforts are the
prerequisites for
immersion.[985](endnotes.xhtml_note-985){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-985
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The cultivation, development, and making
much of these very same things is the development of
immersion."[986](endnotes.xhtml_note-986){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-986
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"How many processes are there?"

"There are these three processes. Physical, verbal, and mental
processes."[987](endnotes.xhtml_note-987){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-987
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, what is the physical process? What's the verbal process?
What's the mental process?"

"Breathing is a physical process. Placing the mind and keeping it
connected are verbal processes. Perception and feeling are mental
processes."

"But ma'am, why is breathing a physical process? Why are placing the
mind and keeping it connected verbal processes? Why are perception and
feeling mental processes?"

"Breathing is physical. It's tied up with the body, that's why breathing
is a physical
process.[988](endnotes.xhtml_note-988){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-988
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} First you place the mind and keep it
connected, then you break into speech. That's why placing the mind and
keeping it connected are verbal
processes.[989](endnotes.xhtml_note-989){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-989
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Perception and feeling are mental. They're
tied up with the mind, that's why perception and feeling are mental
processes."

"But ma'am, how does someone attain the cessation of perception and
feeling?"

"A mendicant who is entering such an attainment does not think: 'I will
enter the cessation of perception and feeling' or 'I am entering the
cessation of perception and feeling' or 'I have entered the cessation of
perception and feeling.' Rather, their mind has been previously
developed so as to lead to such a
state."[990](endnotes.xhtml_note-990){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-990
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, which process ceases first for a mendicant who is entering
the cessation of perception and feeling: physical, verbal, or mental?"

"The verbal process ceases first, then physical, then
mental."[991](endnotes.xhtml_note-991){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-991
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, how does someone emerge from the cessation of perception and
feeling?"

"A mendicant who is emerging from such an attainment does not think: 'I
will emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling' or 'I am
emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling' or 'I have
emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling.' Rather, their
mind has been previously developed so as to lead to such a state."

"But ma'am, which process arises first for a mendicant who is emerging
from the cessation of perception and feeling: physical, verbal, or
mental?"

"The mental process arises first, then physical, then verbal."

"But ma'am, when a mendicant has emerged from the attainment of the
cessation of perception and feeling, how many kinds of contact do they
experience?"

"They experience three kinds of contact: emptiness, signless, and
undirected
contacts."[992](endnotes.xhtml_note-992){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-992
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, when a mendicant has emerged from the attainment of the
cessation of perception and feeling, what does their mind slant, slope,
and incline to?"

"Their mind slants, slopes, and inclines to
seclusion."[993](endnotes.xhtml_note-993){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-993
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But ma'am, how many feelings are there?"

"There are three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling."

"What are these three feelings?"

"Anything felt physically or mentally as pleasant or enjoyable. This is
pleasant feeling. Anything felt physically or mentally as painful or
unpleasant. This is painful feeling. Anything felt physically or
mentally as neither pleasurable nor painful. This is neutral feeling."

"What is pleasant and what is painful regarding each of the three
feelings?"

"Pleasant feeling is pleasant when it remains and painful when it
perishes. Painful feeling is painful when it remains and pleasant when
it perishes. Neutral feeling is pleasant in the presence of knowledge,
and painful in the presence of
ignorance."[994](endnotes.xhtml_note-994){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-994
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What underlying tendencies underlie each of the three feelings?"

"The underlying tendency for greed underlies pleasant feeling. The
underlying tendency for repulsion underlies painful feeling. The
underlying tendency for ignorance underlies neutral feeling."

"Do these underlying tendencies always underlie these feelings?"

"No, they do
not."[995](endnotes.xhtml_note-995){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-995
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What should be given up in regard to each of these three feelings?"

"The underlying tendency to greed should be given up when it comes to
pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to repulsion should be given
up when it comes to painful feeling. The underlying tendency to
ignorance should be given up when it comes to neutral feeling."

"Should these underlying tendencies be given up regarding all instances
of these feelings?"

"No, not in all instances. Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. With this
they give up greed, and the underlying tendency to greed does not lie
within
that.[996](endnotes.xhtml_note-996){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-996
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And take a mendicant who reflects: 'Oh,
when will I enter and remain in the same dimension that the noble ones
enter and remain in
today?'[997](endnotes.xhtml_note-997){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-997
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nursing such a longing for the supreme
liberations gives rise to sadness due to
longing.[998](endnotes.xhtml_note-998){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-998
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With this they give up repulsion, and the
underlying tendency to repulsion does not lie within that. Take a
mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. With this they
give up ignorance, and the underlying tendency to ignorance does not lie
within that."

"But ma'am, what is the counterpart of pleasant feeling?"

"Painful feeling."

"What is the counterpart of painful feeling?"

"Pleasant feeling."

"What is the counterpart of neutral feeling?"

"Ignorance."

"What is the counterpart of ignorance?"

"Knowledge."

"What is the counterpart of knowledge?"

"Freedom."

"What is the counterpart of freedom?"

"Extinguishment."

"What is the counterpart of extinguishment?"

"Your question goes too far, Visākha. You couldn't figure out the limit
of questions. For extinguishment is the culmination, destination, and
end of the spiritual life. If you wish, go to the Buddha and ask him
this question. You should remember it in line with his answer."

And then the layman Visākha approved and agreed with what the nun
Dhammadinnā said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled her, keeping her on his right. Then he went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had
discussed.

When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him, "The nun Dhammadinnā is
astute, Visākha, she has great wisdom. If you came to me and asked this
question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as the nun
Dhammadinnā. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the layman Visākha approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn45">

### [MN 45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on Taking Up Practices ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷadhammasamādānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of taking up practices. What
four? There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that is
painful now and results in future pain. There is a way of taking up
practices that is painful now but results in future pleasure. There is a
way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future
pleasure.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain? There are some ascetics and brahmins who have
this doctrine and view: 'There's nothing wrong with sensual
pleasures.'[999](endnotes.xhtml_note-999){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-999
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They throw themselves into sensual
pleasures, cavorting with female wanderers with jeweled bands in their
hair.[1000](endnotes.xhtml_note-1000){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1000
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They say, 'What future danger do those
ascetics and brahmins see in sensual pleasures that they speak of giving
up sensual pleasures, and advocate the complete understanding of sensual
pleasures? Pleasant is the touch of this female wanderer's arm, tender,
soft, and downy!' And they throw themselves into sensual pleasures. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. And there they feel painful, sharp,
severe, acute feelings. They say, 'This is that future danger that those
ascetics and brahmins saw. For it is because of sensual pleasures that
I'm feeling painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings.'

Suppose that in the last month of summer a camel's foot creeper pod were
to burst
open[1001](endnotes.xhtml_note-1001){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1001
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and a seed were to fall at the root of a
sal tree. Then the deity haunting that sal tree would become
apprehensive and nervous. But their friends and colleagues, relatives
and kin---deities of the parks, forests, trees, and those who haunt the
herbs, grass, and big trees---would come together to reassure them, 'Do
not fear, sir, do not fear! Hopefully that seed will be swallowed by a
peacock, or eaten by a deer, or burnt by a forest fire, or picked up by
a lumberjack, or eaten by termites, or it may not even be
fertile.'[1002](endnotes.xhtml_note-1002){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1002
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But none of these things happened. And the
seed was fertile, so that when the monsoon clouds soaked it with rain,
it sprouted. And the creeper wound its tender, soft, and downy tendrils
around that sal tree. Then the deity thought, 'What future danger did my
friends see when they said: "Do not fear, sir, do not fear! Hopefully
that seed will be swallowed by a peacock, or eaten by a deer, or burnt
by a forest fire, or picked up by a lumberjack, or eaten by termites, or
it may not even be fertile." Pleasant is the touch of this creeper's
tender, soft, and downy tendrils.' Then the creeper enfolded the sal
tree, made a canopy over it, draped a curtain around it, and split apart
all the main branches. Then the deity thought, 'This is the future
danger that my friends saw! It's because of that camel's foot creeper
seed that I'm feeling painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings.'

In the same way, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view: 'There's nothing wrong with sensual pleasures' ...
This is called the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pain? It's when someone goes naked, ignoring
conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called.
They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on their
behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything from a
pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a
shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a
woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or
where there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or
meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for
alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to
seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They're devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening. And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of
mortifying and tormenting the body. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. This is called the way of taking up practices that is painful now
and results in future pain.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now but
results in future pleasure? It's when someone is ordinarily full of
acute greed, hate, and delusion. They often feel the pain and sadness
that greed, hate, and delusion bring. They lead the full and pure
spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful
faces.[1003](endnotes.xhtml_note-1003){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1003
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is called the way
of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future
pleasure.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pleasure? It's when someone is not ordinarily full of
acute greed, hate, and delusion. They rarely feel the pain and sadness
that greed, hate, and delusion bring. Quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in
the first absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is called the way of
taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure.
These are the four ways of taking up practices."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn46">

### [MN 46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Discourse on Taking Up Practices ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahādhammasamādānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1004](endnotes.xhtml_note-1004){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1004
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, sentient beings typically have the wish, desire, and hope:
'Oh, if only unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things would
decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things would increase!'
But exactly the opposite happens to them. What do you take to be the
reason for this?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and
is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the true persons. They don't know what practices they
should cultivate and foster, and what practices they shouldn't cultivate
and foster. So they cultivate and foster practices they shouldn't, and
don't cultivate and foster practices they should. When they do so,
unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things increase, and likable,
desirable, and agreeable things decrease. Why is that? Because that's
what it's like for someone who doesn't know.

But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
know what practices they should cultivate and foster, and what practices
they shouldn't cultivate and foster. So they cultivate and foster
practices they should, and don't cultivate and foster practices they
shouldn't. When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
things decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things increase.
Why is that? Because that's what it's like for someone who knows.

Mendicants, there are these four ways of taking up practices. What four?
There is a way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in
future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now
but results in future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that
is painful now but results in future pleasure. There is a way of taking
up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure.

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pain, an ignoramus, without knowing this, doesn't
truly understand: 'This is the way of taking up practices that is
painful now and results in future pain.' So instead of avoiding that
practice, they cultivate it. When they do so, unlikable, undesirable,
and disagreeable things increase, and likable, desirable, and agreeable
things decrease. Why is that? Because that's what it's like for someone
who doesn't know.

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pain, an ignoramus ... cultivates it ... and
disagreeable things increase ...

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pleasure, an ignoramus ... doesn't cultivate it ...
and disagreeable things increase ...

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pleasure, an ignoramus ... doesn't cultivate it ...
and disagreeable things increase ... Why is that? Because that's what
it's like for someone who doesn't know.

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pain, a wise person, knowing this, truly understands:
'This is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results
in future pain.' So instead of cultivating that practice, they avoid it.
When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things
decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things increase. Why is
that? Because that's what it's like for someone who knows.

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pain, a wise person ... doesn't cultivate it ... and
agreeable things increase ...

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pleasure, a wise person ... cultivates it ... and
agreeable things increase ...

When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pleasure, a wise person, knowing this, truly
understands: 'This is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant
now and results in future pleasure.' So instead of avoiding that
practice, they cultivate it. When they do so, unlikable, undesirable,
and disagreeable things decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable
things increase. Why is that? Because that's what it's like for someone
who knows.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and
results in future pain? It's when someone in pain and sadness kills
living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. Because of these things they experience pain
and sadness. And when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. This is called
the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future
pain.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain? It's when someone with pleasure and happiness
kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
covetous, malicious, with wrong view. Because of these things they
experience pleasure and happiness. But when their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. This is called the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now
but results in future pain.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now but
results in future pleasure? It's when someone in pain and sadness
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And
they're contented, kind-hearted, with right view. Because of these
things they experience pain and sadness. But when their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is
called the way of taking up practices that is painful now but results in
future pleasure.

And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and
results in future pleasure? It's when someone with pleasure and
happiness doesn't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual
misconduct. They don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted, with right view.
Because of these things they experience pleasure and happiness. And when
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. This is called the way of taking up practices that is
pleasant now and results in future pleasure. These are the four ways of
taking up practices.

Suppose there was some bitter gourd mixed with poison. Then a man would
come along who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to be
happy and recoils from pain. They'd say to him: 'Here, mister, this is
bitter gourd mixed with poison. Drink it if you like. If you drink it,
the color, aroma, and flavor will be unappetizing, and it will result in
death or deadly pain.' He wouldn't reject it. Without reflection, he'd
drink it. The color, aroma, and flavor would be unappetizing, and it
would result in death or deadly pain. This is comparable to the way of
taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain, I
say.

Suppose there was a bronze cup of beverage that had a nice color, aroma,
and flavor. But it was mixed with poison. Then a man would come along
who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to be happy and
recoils from pain. They'd say to him: 'Here, mister, this bronze cup of
beverage has a nice color, aroma, and flavor. But it's mixed with
poison. Drink it if you like. If you drink it, the color, aroma, and
flavor will be appetizing, but it will result in death or deadly pain.'
He wouldn't reject it. Without reflection, he'd drink it. The color,
aroma, and flavor would be appetizing, but it would result in death or
deadly pain. This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that
is pleasant now and results in future pain, I say.

Suppose there was some rancid urine mixed with different
medicines.[1005](endnotes.xhtml_note-1005){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1005
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a man with jaundice would come along.
They'd say to him: 'Here, mister, this is rancid urine mixed with
different medicines. Drink it if you like. If you drink it, the color,
aroma, and flavor will be unappetizing, but after drinking it you will
be happy.' He wouldn't reject it. After appraisal, he'd drink it. The
color, aroma, and flavor would be unappetizing, but after drinking it he
would be happy. This is comparable to the way of taking up practices
that is painful now and results in future pleasure, I say.

Suppose there was some curds, honey, ghee, and molasses all mixed
together. Then a man with bloody dysentery would come along. They'd say
to him: 'Here, mister, this is curds, honey, ghee, and molasses all
mixed together. Drink it if you like. If you drink it, the color, aroma,
and flavor will be appetizing, and after drinking it you will be happy.'
He wouldn't reject it. After appraisal, he'd drink it. The color, aroma,
and flavor would be appetizing, and after drinking it he would be happy.
This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant
now and results in future pleasure, I say.

It's like the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the
heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is rising to the
firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it shines and
glows and radiates. In the same way, this way of taking up practices
that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure dispels the
doctrines of the various other ascetics and brahmins as it shines and
glows and
radiates."[1006](endnotes.xhtml_note-1006){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1006
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn47">

### [MN 47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Inquirer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vīmaṁsakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1007](endnotes.xhtml_note-1007){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1007
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant who is an inquirer, unable to comprehend
another's mind, should scrutinize the Realized One to see whether he is
a fully awakened Buddha or
not."[1008](endnotes.xhtml_note-1008){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1008
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant who is an inquirer, unable to comprehend
another's mind, should scrutinize the Realized One for two
things---things that can be seen and heard: 'Can anything corrupt be
seen or heard in the Realized One or
not?'[1009](endnotes.xhtml_note-1009){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1009
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Scrutinizing him they find that nothing
corrupt can be seen or heard in the Realized One.

They scrutinize further: 'Can anything mixed be seen or heard in the
Realized One or not?' Scrutinizing him they find that nothing mixed can
be seen or heard in the Realized One.

They scrutinize further: 'Can anything clean be seen or heard in the
Realized One or not?' Scrutinizing him they find that clean things can
be seen and heard in the Realized One.

They scrutinize further: 'Did the venerable attain this skillful state a
long time ago, or just
recently?'[1010](endnotes.xhtml_note-1010){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1010
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Scrutinizing him they find that the
venerable attained this skillful state a long time ago, not just
recently.

They scrutinize further: 'Are certain dangers found in that venerable
mendicant who has achieved fame and renown?' For, mendicants, so long as
a mendicant has not achieved fame and renown, certain dangers are not
found in them. But when they achieve fame and renown, those dangers
appear. Scrutinizing him they find that those dangers are not found in
that venerable mendicant who has achieved fame and renown.

They scrutinize further: 'Is this venerable securely stilled or
insecurely
stilled?[1011](endnotes.xhtml_note-1011){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1011
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Is the reason they don't indulge in sensual
pleasures that they're free of greed because greed has ended?'
Scrutinizing him they find that that venerable is securely stilled, not
insecurely stilled. The reason they don't indulge in sensual pleasures
is that they're free of greed because greed has ended.

If others should ask that mendicant, 'But what reason and evidence does
the venerable have for saying this?' Answering rightly, the mendicant
should say, 'Because, whether that venerable is staying in a community
or alone, some people there are in a good state or a sorry state, some
instruct a group, and some are seen among pleasures of the flesh while
others remain unsullied. Yet that venerable doesn't look down on them
for
that.[1012](endnotes.xhtml_note-1012){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1012
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Also, I have heard and learned this in the
presence of the Buddha: "I am securely stilled, not insecurely stilled.
The reason I don't indulge in sensual pleasures is that I'm free of
greed because greed has
ended."'[1013](endnotes.xhtml_note-1013){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1013
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Next, they should ask the Realized One himself about this, 'Can anything
corrupt be seen or heard in the Realized One or not?' The Realized One
would answer, 'Nothing corrupt can be seen or heard in the Realized
One.'

'Can anything mixed be seen or heard in the Realized One or not?' The
Realized One would answer, 'Nothing mixed can be seen or heard in the
Realized One.'

'Can anything clean be seen or heard in the Realized One or not?' The
Realized One would answer, 'Clean things can be seen and heard in the
Realized One. I am the range and the territory of that, but I am not
determined by
that.'[1014](endnotes.xhtml_note-1014){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1014
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A disciple ought to approach a teacher who has such a doctrine in order
to listen to the teaching. The teacher explains Dhamma with its higher
and higher stages, with its better and better stages, with its dark and
bright
sides.[1015](endnotes.xhtml_note-1015){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1015
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they directly know a certain principle
of those teachings, in accordance with how they were taught, the
mendicant comes to a conclusion about the teachings. They have
confidence in the teacher: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha!
The teaching is well explained! The Saṅgha is practicing well!'

If others should ask that mendicant, 'But what reason and evidence does
the venerable have for saying this?' Answering rightly, the mendicant
should say, 'Reverends, I approached the Buddha to listen to the
teaching. He explained Dhamma with its higher and higher stages, with
its better and better stages, with its dark and bright sides. When I
directly knew a certain principle of those teachings, in accordance with
how I was taught, I came to a conclusion about the teachings. I had
confidence in the Teacher: "The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha!
The teaching is well explained! The Saṅgha is practicing well!"'

When someone's faith is settled, rooted, and planted in the Realized One
in this manner, with these words and phrases, it's said to be grounded
faith that's based on
evidence.[1016](endnotes.xhtml_note-1016){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1016
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is strong, and cannot be shifted by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the
world.[1017](endnotes.xhtml_note-1017){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1017
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is how there is legitimate scrutiny of
the Realized One, and that is how the Realized One is legitimately
well-scrutinized."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn48">

### [MN 48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Mendicants of Kosambī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kosambiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time the mendicants of Kosambī were arguing, quarreling, and
disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed
words.[1018](endnotes.xhtml_note-1018){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1018
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They couldn't persuade each other or be
persuaded, nor could they convince each other or be convinced.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what was happening.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
those mendicants that the teacher summons them."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to those monks and said,
"Venerables, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," those monks replied. They went to the Buddha, bowed,
and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them,

"Is it really true, mendicants, that you have been arguing, quarreling,
and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words? And
that you can't persuade each other or be persuaded, nor can you convince
each other or be convinced?"

"Yes, sir," they said.

"What do you think, mendicants? When you're arguing, quarreling, and
disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words, are you
treating your spiritual companions with kindness by way of body, speech,
and mind, both in public and in private?"

"No, sir."

"So it seems that when you're arguing you are not treating each other
with kindness. So what exactly do you know and see, you futile men, that
you behave in such a way? This will be for your lasting harm and
suffering."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without
quarreling.[1019](endnotes.xhtml_note-1019){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1019
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What six? Firstly, a mendicant consistently
treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public
and in private. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions
...

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Of these six warm-hearted qualities, the chief is the view that is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. It holds and binds everything together. It's like a
bungalow. The roof-peak is the chief point, which holds and binds
everything together. In the same way, of these six warm-hearted
qualities, the chief is the view that is noble and emancipating, and
delivers one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. It
holds and binds everything together.

And how does the view that is noble and emancipating lead one who
practices it to the complete ending of suffering? It's when a mendicant
has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut,
and reflects like this, 'Is there anything that I'm overcome with
internally and haven't given up, because of which I might not accurately
know and see?' If a mendicant is overcome with sensual desire, it's
their mind that's overcome. If a mendicant is overcome with ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, doubt, pursuing
speculation about this world, pursuing speculation about the next world,
or arguing, quarreling, and disputing, continually wounding others with
barbed words, it's their mind that's overcome. They understand, 'There
is nothing that I'm overcome with internally and haven't given up,
because of which I might not accurately know and see. My mind is
properly disposed for awakening to the truths.' This is the first
knowledge they have achieved that is noble and transcendent, and is not
shared with ordinary people.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'When I develop, cultivate, and
make much of this view, do I personally gain serenity and quenching?'
They understand, 'When I develop, cultivate, and make much of this view,
I personally gain serenity and quenching.' This is their second
knowledge ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'Are there any ascetics or
brahmins outside of the Buddhist community who have the same kind of
view that I have?' They understand, 'There are no ascetics or brahmins
outside of the Buddhist community who have the same kind of view that I
have.' This is their third knowledge ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'Do I have the same nature as a
person accomplished in view?' And what, mendicants, is the nature of a
person accomplished in view? This is the nature of a person accomplished
in view. Though they may fall into a kind of offense for which
resolution is possible, they quickly disclose, clarify, and reveal it to
the Teacher or a sensible spiritual
companion.[1020](endnotes.xhtml_note-1020){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1020
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And having revealed it they restrain
themselves in the future. Suppose there was a little baby boy. If he
puts his hand or foot on a burning coal, he quickly pulls it back. In
the same way, this is the nature of a person accomplished in view.
Though they may still fall into a kind of offense for which resolution
is possible, they quickly reveal it to the Teacher or a sensible
spiritual companion. And having revealed it they restrain themselves in
the future. They understand, 'I have the same nature as a person
accomplished in view.' This is their fourth knowledge ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'Do I have the same nature as a
person accomplished in view?' And what, mendicants, is the nature of a
person accomplished in view? This is the nature of a person accomplished
in view. Though they might manage a diverse spectrum of duties for their
spiritual companions, they still feel a keen regard for the training in
higher ethics, higher mind, and higher wisdom. Suppose there was a cow
with a baby calf. She watches her calf devotedly as she
grazes.[1021](endnotes.xhtml_note-1021){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1021
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, this is the nature of a
person accomplished in view. Though they might manage a diverse spectrum
of duties for their spiritual companions, they still feel a keen regard
for the training in higher ethics, higher mind, and higher wisdom. They
understand, 'I have the same nature as a person accomplished in view.'
This is their fifth knowledge ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'Do I have the same strength as
a person accomplished in view?' And what, mendicants, is the strength of
a person accomplished in view? The strength of a person accomplished in
view is that, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One are being taught, they pay attention, apply the mind, concentrate
wholeheartedly, and actively listen. They understand, 'I have the same
strength as a person accomplished in view.' This is their sixth
knowledge ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects, 'Do I have the same strength as
a person accomplished in view?' And what, mendicants, is the strength of
a person accomplished in view? The strength of a person accomplished in
view is that, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One are being taught, they find inspiration in the meaning and the
teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching. They understand, 'I
have the same strength as a person accomplished in view.' This is the
seventh knowledge they have achieved that is noble and transcendent, and
is not shared with ordinary people.

When a noble disciple has these seven factors, they have properly
investigated their nature through the realization of the fruit of
stream-entry.[1022](endnotes.xhtml_note-1022){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1022
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A noble disciple with these seven factors
has the fruit of stream-entry."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn49">

### [MN 49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [On the Invitation of Brahmā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brahmanimantanikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1023](endnotes.xhtml_note-1023){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1023
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"This one time, mendicants, I was staying near Ukkaṭṭhā, in the Subhaga
Forest at the root of a magnificent sal
tree.[1024](endnotes.xhtml_note-1024){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1024
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now at that time Baka the Brahmā had the
following harmful
misconception:[1025](endnotes.xhtml_note-1025){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1025
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is permanent, this is everlasting,
this is eternal, this is whole, this is not liable to pass away. For
this is where there's no being born, growing old, dying, passing away,
or being reborn. And there's no other escape beyond
this.'[1026](endnotes.xhtml_note-1026){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1026
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then I knew what Baka the Brahmā was thinking. As easily as a strong
person would extend or contract their arm, I vanished from the Subhaga
Forest and reappeared in that Brahmā realm.

Baka saw me coming off in the distance and said, 'Come, good sir!
Welcome, good
sir\![1027](endnotes.xhtml_note-1027){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1027
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's been a long time since you took the
opportunity to come here. For this is permanent, this is everlasting,
this is eternal, this is complete, this is not liable to pass away. For
this is where there's no being born, growing old, dying, passing away,
or being reborn. And there's no other escape beyond this.'

When he had spoken, I said to him, 'Alas, Baka the Brahmā is lost in
ignorance! Alas, Baka the Brahmā is lost in ignorance! Because what is
actually impermanent, not lasting, transient, incomplete, and liable to
pass away, he says is permanent, everlasting, eternal, complete, and not
liable to pass away. And where there is being born, growing old, dying,
passing away, and being reborn, he says that there's no being born,
growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. And although there is
another escape beyond this, he says that there's no other escape beyond
this.'

Then Māra the Wicked took possession of a member of Brahmā's retinue and
said this to me, 'Mendicant, mendicant! Don't attack this one! Don't
attack this one! For this is Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher,
the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God
Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born.[1028](endnotes.xhtml_note-1028){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1028
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There have been ascetics and brahmins before you, mendicant, who
criticized and loathed earth, water, fire, air, creatures, gods, the
Progenitor, and
Brahmā.[1029](endnotes.xhtml_note-1029){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1029
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When their bodies broke up and their breath
was cut off they were reborn in a lower
realm.[1030](endnotes.xhtml_note-1030){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1030
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There have been ascetics and brahmins before you, mendicant, who praised
and approved earth, water, fire, air, creatures, gods, the Progenitor,
and
Brahmā.[1031](endnotes.xhtml_note-1031){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1031
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When their bodies broke up and their breath
was cut off they were reborn in a higher realm.

So, mendicant, I tell you this: please, good sir, do exactly what Brahmā
says. Don't go beyond the word of Brahmā. If you do, then you'll end up
like a person who, when approached by Lady Luck, would ward her off with
a staff; or who, as they are falling over a cliff, would lose grip of
the ground with their hands and
feet.[1032](endnotes.xhtml_note-1032){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1032
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please, dear sir, do exactly what Brahmā
says. Don't go beyond the word of Brahmā. Do you not see the assembly of
Brahmā gathered here?'

And so Māra the Wicked presented the assembly of Brahmā to me.

When he had spoken, I said to Māra, 'I know you, Wicked One. Do not
think, "He does not know me." You are Māra the Wicked. And Brahmā,
Brahmā's assembly, and Brahmā's retinue have all fallen into your hands;
they're under your
sway.[1033](endnotes.xhtml_note-1033){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1033
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And you think, "Maybe this one, too, has
fallen into my hands; maybe he's under my sway!" But I haven't fallen
into your hands; I'm not under your sway.'

When I had spoken, Baka the Brahmā said to me, 'But, good sir, what I
say is permanent, everlasting, eternal, complete, and not liable to pass
away is in fact permanent, everlasting, eternal, complete, and not
liable to pass away. And where I say there's no being born, growing old,
dying, passing away, or being reborn there is in
fact[1034](endnotes.xhtml_note-1034){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1034
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} no being born, growing old, dying, passing
away, or being reborn. And when I say there's no other escape beyond
this there is in fact no other escape beyond this. There have been
ascetics and brahmins in the world before you, mendicant, whose deeds of
fervent mortification lasted as long as your entire
life.[1035](endnotes.xhtml_note-1035){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1035
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When there was another escape beyond this
they knew it, and when there was no other escape beyond this, they knew
it. So, mendicant, I tell you this: you will never find another escape
beyond this, and you will eventually get weary and frustrated. If you
attach to earth, you will lie close to me, in my domain, subject to my
will, and expendable. If you attach to water ... fire ... air ...
creatures ... gods ... the Progenitor ... Brahmā, you will lie close to
me, in my domain, subject to my will, and expendable.'

'Brahmā, I too know that if I attach to earth, I will lie close to you,
in your domain, subject to your will, and expendable. If I attach to
water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ... the Progenitor ...
Brahmā, I will lie close to you, in your domain, subject to your will,
and expendable. And in addition, Brahmā, I understand your range and
your
light:[1036](endnotes.xhtml_note-1036){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1036
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "That's how powerful is Baka the Brahmā,
how illustrious and mighty."'

'But in what way do you understand my range and my light?'

> 'A galaxy extends a thousand times as far\
> as the moon and sun revolve\
> and the shining ones light up the quarters.\
> And there you wield your power.
>
> You know the high and low,\
> the passionate and dispassionate,\
> and the coming and going of sentient beings\
> from this realm to another.

That's how I understand your range and your light.

But there are three other realms that you don't know or
see,[1037](endnotes.xhtml_note-1037){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1037
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but which I know and
see.[1038](endnotes.xhtml_note-1038){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1038
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There is the realm named after the gods of
streaming radiance. You passed away from there and were reborn
here.[1039](endnotes.xhtml_note-1039){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1039
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You've dwelt here so long that you've
forgotten about that, so you don't know it or see
it.[1040](endnotes.xhtml_note-1040){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1040
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I know it and see it. So Brahmā, I am
not your equal in knowledge, let alone your inferior. Rather, I know
more than you.

There is the realm named after the gods of universal beauty ... There is
the realm named after the gods of abundant fruit, which you don't know
or
see.[1041](endnotes.xhtml_note-1041){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1041
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I know it and see it. So Brahmā, I am
not your equal in knowledge, let alone your inferior. Rather, I know
more than you.

Since directly knowing earth as earth, and since directly knowing that
which does not fall within the scope of experience characterized by
earth, I have not become earth, I have not become in earth, I have not
become as earth, I have not become one who thinks 'earth is mine', I
have not affirmed
earth.[1042](endnotes.xhtml_note-1042){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1042
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So Brahmā, I am not your equal in
knowledge, let alone your inferior. Rather, I know more than you.

Since directly knowing water ... fire ... air ... creatures ... gods ...
the Progenitor ... Brahmā ... the gods of streaming radiance ... the
gods of universal beauty ... the gods of abundant fruit ... the
Vanquisher ... Since directly knowing all as all, and since directly
knowing that which does not fall within the scope of experience
characterized by all, I have not become all, I have not become in all, I
have not become as all, I have not become one who thinks 'all is mine',
I have not affirmed
all.[1043](endnotes.xhtml_note-1043){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1043
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So Brahmā, I am not your equal in
knowledge, let alone your inferior. Rather, I know more than you.'

'Well, good sir, if you have directly known that which does not fall
within the scope of experience characterized by all, may that not be
vacuous and hollow for
you\![1044](endnotes.xhtml_note-1044){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1044
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> Consciousness where nothing
> appears,[1045](endnotes.xhtml_note-1045){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1045
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> infinite, luminous all-round.

That is what does not fall within the scope of experience characterized
by earth, water, fire, air, creatures, gods, the Progenitor, Brahmā, the
gods of streaming radiance, the gods of universal beauty, the gods of
abundant fruit, the Vanquisher, and the all.

Well look now, good sir, I will vanish from you!'

'All right, then, Brahmā, vanish from me---if you can.'

Then Baka the Brahmā said, 'I will vanish from the ascetic Gotama! I
will vanish from the ascetic Gotama!' But he was unable to vanish from
me.[1046](endnotes.xhtml_note-1046){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1046
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So I said to him, 'Well now, Brahmā, I will vanish from you!'

'All right, then, good sir, vanish from me---if you can.'

Then I used my psychic power to will that my voice would extend so that
Brahmā, his assembly, and his retinue would hear me, but they would not
see
me.[1047](endnotes.xhtml_note-1047){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1047
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And while vanished I recited this verse:

> 'Seeing the danger in continued
> existence---[1048](endnotes.xhtml_note-1048){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1048
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> that life in any existence will cease to
> be---[1049](endnotes.xhtml_note-1049){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1049
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> I didn't affirm any kind of existence,\
> and didn't grasp at relishing.'

Then Brahmā, his assembly, and his retinue, their minds full of wonder
and amazement, thought, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! The ascetic
Gotama has such psychic power and might! We've never before seen or
heard of any other ascetic or brahmin with psychic power and might like
the ascetic Gotama, who has gone forth from the Sakyan clan. Though
people enjoy continued existence, loving it so much, he has extracted
it, root and all.'

Then Māra the Wicked took possession of a member of Brahmā's retinue and
said this to me, 'If such is your understanding, good sir, do not
present it to your disciples or those gone
forth\![1050](endnotes.xhtml_note-1050){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1050
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do not teach this Dhamma to your disciples
or those gone forth! Do not wish this for your disciples or those gone
forth!

There have been ascetics and brahmins before you, mendicant, who claimed
to be perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas. They presented, taught,
and wished this for their disciples and those gone forth. When their
bodies broke up and their breath was cut off they were reborn in a lower
realm.

But there have also been other ascetics and brahmins before you,
mendicant, who claimed to be perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas.
They did not present, teach, or wish this for their disciples and those
gone forth. When their bodies broke up and their breath was cut off they
were reborn in a higher realm.

So, mendicant, I tell you this: please, good sir, remain passive,
dwelling in blissful meditation in the present life, for this is better
left unsaid. Good sir, do not instruct others.'

When he had spoken, I said to Māra, 'I know you, Wicked One. Do not
think, "He doesn't know me." You are Māra the Wicked. You don't speak to
me like this out of sympathy, but with no sympathy. For you think,
"Those who the ascetic Gotama teaches will go beyond my reach."

Those who formerly claimed to be fully awakened Buddhas were not in fact
fully awakened Buddhas. But I am. The Realized One remains as such
whether or not he teaches disciples. The Realized One remains as such
whether or not he presents the teaching to disciples. Why is that?
Because the Realized One has given up the defilements that are
corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and
future rebirth, old age, and death. He has cut them off at the root,
made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so they are unable to
arise in the future. Just as a palm tree with its crown cut off is
incapable of further growth, the Realized One has given up the
defilements that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful,
resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. He has
cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them
so they are unable to arise in the future.'"

And so, because of the silencing of Māra, and because of the invitation
of Brahmā, the name of this discussion is "On the Invitation of Brahmā".

</article>
<article id="mn50">

### [MN 50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Condemnation of Māra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Māratajjanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was
staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park
at Bhesakaḷā's
Wood.[1051](endnotes.xhtml_note-1051){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1051
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

At that time Moggallāna was walking mindfully in the open air.

Now at that time Māra the Wicked had got inside Moggallāna's
belly.[1052](endnotes.xhtml_note-1052){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1052
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Moggallāna thought, "Why now is my belly so
very heavy, like I've just eaten a load of
beans?"[1053](endnotes.xhtml_note-1053){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1053
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he stepped down from the walking path,
entered his dwelling, sat down on the seat spread out, and investigated
inside himself.

He saw that Māra the Wicked had got inside his belly. So he said to
Māra, "Come out, Wicked One, come out! Do not harass the Realized One or
his disciple. Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

Then Māra thought, "This ascetic doesn't really know me or see me when
he tells me to come out. Not even the Teacher could recognize me so
quickly, so how could a disciple?"

Then Moggallāna said to Māra, "I know you even when you're like this,
Wicked One. Do not think, 'He doesn't know me.' You are Māra the Wicked.
And you think, 'This ascetic doesn't really know me or see me when he
tells me to come out. Not even the Teacher could recognize me so
quickly, so how could a disciple?'"

Then Māra thought, "This ascetic really does know me and see me when he
tells me to come out."

Then Māra came up out of Moggallāna's mouth and stood against the door.
Moggallāna saw him there and said, "I see you even there, Wicked One. Do
not think, 'He doesn't see me.' That's you, Wicked One, standing against
the door.

Once upon a time, Wicked One, I was a Māra named Dūsī, and I had a
sister named
Kāḷī.[1054](endnotes.xhtml_note-1054){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1054
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You were her son, which made you my nephew.

At that time Kakusandha, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha arose in the
world.[1055](endnotes.xhtml_note-1055){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1055
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Kakusandha had a fine pair of chief
disciples named Vidhura and Sañjīva. Of all the disciples of the Buddha
Kakusandha, none were the equal of Venerable Vidhura in teaching Dhamma.
And that's how he came to be known as
Vidhura.[1056](endnotes.xhtml_note-1056){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1056
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But when Venerable Sañjīva had gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a
tree, or to an empty hut, he easily attained the cessation of perception
and feeling. Once upon a time, Sañjīva was sitting at the root of a
certain tree having attained the cessation of perception and feeling.
Some cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and passers-by saw him sitting there
and said, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! This ascetic passed away
while seated. We should cremate him.' They collected grass, wood, and
cow-dung, heaped it all on Sañjīva's body, set it on fire, and left.

Then, when the night had passed, Sañjīva emerged from that attainment,
shook out his robes, and, since it was morning, he robed up and entered
the village for alms. Those cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and passers-by
saw him wandering for alms and said, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing!
This ascetic passed away while seated, and now he has come back to
life!' And that's how he came to be known as
Sañjīva.[1057](endnotes.xhtml_note-1057){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1057
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to Māra Dūsī, 'I don't know the course of rebirth of
these ethical mendicants of good
character.[1058](endnotes.xhtml_note-1058){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1058
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I take possession of these
brahmins and householders and say, "Come, all of you, abuse, attack,
harass, and trouble the ethical mendicants of good
character.[1059](endnotes.xhtml_note-1059){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1059
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Hopefully by doing this we can upset their
minds so that Māra Dūsī can find a vulnerability."' And that's exactly
what he did.

Then those brahmins and householders abused, attacked, harassed, and
troubled the ethical mendicants of good character: 'These shavelings,
fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our kinsman,
say, "We practice absorption meditation! We practice absorption
meditation!" Shoulders drooping, downcast, and dopey, they meditate and
concentrate and contemplate and
ruminate.[1060](endnotes.xhtml_note-1060){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1060
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're just like an owl on a branch, which
meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a
mouse. They're just like a jackal on a river-bank, which meditates and
concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a fish. They're
just like a cat by an alley or a drain or a dustbin, which meditates and
concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a mouse. They're
just like an unladen donkey by an alley or a drain or a dustbin, which
meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates. In the same
way, these shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the
feet of our kinsman, say, "We practice absorption meditation! We
practice absorption meditation!" Shoulders drooping, downcast, and
dopey, they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate.'

Most of the people who died at that time---when their body broke up,
after death---were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Then Kakusandha the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, addressed the mendicants: 'Mendicants, the brahmins and
householders have been possessed by Māra Dūsī. He told them to abuse you
in the hope of upsetting your minds so that he can find a vulnerability.
Come, all of you mendicants, meditate spreading a heart full of love to
one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth.
In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill
will.[1061](endnotes.xhtml_note-1061){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1061
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion ... Meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... Meditate
spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of equanimity
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will.'

When those mendicants were instructed and advised by the Buddha
Kakusandha in this way, they went to a wilderness, or to the root of a
tree, or to an empty hut, where they meditated spreading a heart full of
love ... compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity.

Then it occurred to Māra Dūsī, 'Even when I do this I don't know the
course of rebirth of these ethical mendicants of good character. Why
don't I take possession of these brahmins and householders and say,
"Come, all of you, honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the ethical
mendicants of good character. Hopefully by doing this we can upset their
minds so that Māra Dūsī can find a
vulnerability."'[1062](endnotes.xhtml_note-1062){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1062
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And that's exactly what he did. Then those brahmins and householders
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated the ethical mendicants of
good character.

Most of the people who died at that time---when their body broke up,
after death---were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

Then Kakusandha the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, addressed the mendicants: 'Mendicants, the brahmins and
householders have been possessed by Māra Dūsī. He told them to venerate
you in the hope of upsetting your minds so that he can find a
vulnerability. Come, all you mendicants, meditate observing the ugliness
of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving
dissatisfaction with the whole world, and observing the impermanence of
all
conditions.'[1063](endnotes.xhtml_note-1063){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1063
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When those mendicants were instructed and advised by the Buddha
Kakusandha in this way, they went to a wilderness, or to the root of a
tree, or to an empty hut, where they meditated observing the ugliness of
the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving
dissatisfaction with the whole world, and observing the impermanence of
all conditions.

Then the Buddha Kakusandha robed up in the morning and, taking this bowl
and robe, entered the village for alms with Venerable Vidhura as his
second monk.

Then Māra Dūsī took possession of a certain boy, picked up a rock, and
hit Vidhura on the head, cracking it open. Then Vidhura, with blood
pouring from his cracked skull, still followed behind the Buddha
Kakusandha.[1064](endnotes.xhtml_note-1064){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1064
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha Kakusandha turned to gaze
back, the way that elephants do,
saying,[1065](endnotes.xhtml_note-1065){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1065
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This Māra Dūsī knows no bounds.' And as he
was gazing, Māra Dūsī fell from that place and was reborn in the Great
Hell.[1066](endnotes.xhtml_note-1066){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1066
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now that Great Hell is known by three names: 'Related to the Six Fields
of Contact' and also 'The Impaling With Spikes' and also 'Individually
Painful'.[1067](endnotes.xhtml_note-1067){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1067
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the wardens of hell came to me and
said, 'When spike meets spike in your heart, you will know that you've
been roasting in hell for a thousand years.'

I roasted for many years, many centuries, many millennia in that Great
Hell. For ten thousand years I roasted in the annex of that Great Hell,
experiencing the pain called 'this is
emergence'.[1068](endnotes.xhtml_note-1068){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1068
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} My body was in human form, but I had the
head of a fish.

> What kind of hell was that,\
> where Dūsī was roasted\
> after attacking the disciple Vidhura\
> along with the brahmin Kakusandha?
>
> There were 100 iron spikes,\
> each one individually painful.\
> That's the kind of hell\
> where Dūsī was roasted\
> after attacking the disciple Vidhura\
> along with the brahmin Kakusandha.
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> There are mansions that last an eon\
> standing in the middle of a lake.\
> Sapphire-colored, brilliant,\
> they sparkle and shine.\
> Dancing there are nymphs\
> shining in all different colors.
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> I'm the one who, urged by the Buddha,\
> shook the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother\
> with his big toe\
> as the Saṅgha of mendicants
> watched.[1069](endnotes.xhtml_note-1069){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1069
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> I'm the one who shook the Palace of Victory\
> with his big toe\
> owing to psychic power,\
> inspiring deities to
> awe.[1070](endnotes.xhtml_note-1070){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1070
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> I'm the one who asked Sakka\
> in the Palace of Victory:\
> 'Vāsava, I hope you
> recall[1071](endnotes.xhtml_note-1071){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1071
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the one who is freed through the ending of
> craving?'[1072](endnotes.xhtml_note-1072){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1072
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> And I'm the one to whom Sakka\
> admitted the truth when asked.
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> I'm the one who asked Brahmā\
> in the Hall of Justice before the assembly:\
> 'Reverend, do you still have the same view\
> that you had in the past?\
> Or do you see the radiance\
> transcending the Brahmā realm?'
>
> And I'm the one to whom Brahmā\
> truthfully admitted his progress:\
> 'Good sir, I don't have that view\
> that I had in the past.
>
> I see the radiance\
> transcending the Brahmā realm.\
> So how could I say today\
> that I am permanent and
> eternal?'[1073](endnotes.xhtml_note-1073){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1073
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> I'm the one who touched the peak of Mount Meru\
> using the power of meditative liberation.\
> I've visited the forests of the people\
> who dwell in the Eastern Continent.
>
> Dark One, if you attack\
> a mendicant who directly knows this,\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> you'll fall into suffering.
>
> Though a fire doesn't think,\
> 'I'll burn the fool!'\
> Still the fool who attacks\
> the fire gets burnt.
>
> In the same way, Māra,\
> in attacking the Realized One,\
> you'll only burn yourself,\
> like a fool touching the flames.
>
> Māra's done a bad thing\
> in attacking the Realized One.\
> Wicked One, do you imagine that\
> your wickedness won't bear fruit?
>
> Your deeds heap up wickedness\
> that will last a long time, terminator!\
> Give up on the Buddha, Māra!\
> And hold no hope for the mendicants!"
>
> That is how, in the Bhesekaḷā
> grove,[1074](endnotes.xhtml_note-1074){#mn-culayamakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1074
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the mendicant condemned Māra.\
> That spirit, downcast,\
> disappeared right there.

</article>

[]{#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml}

# The Middle Fifty {#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn-majjhimapannasa .section-title .heading}

## The Chapter on Householders {#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_mn-gahapativagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn51">

### [MN 51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kandaraka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kandarakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā
on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants.[1075](endnotes.xhtml_note-1075){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1075
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Pessa the elephant driver's son and Kandaraka the wanderer went to
see the Buddha. When they had approached, Pessa bowed and sat down to
one
side.[1076](endnotes.xhtml_note-1076){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1076
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the wanderer Kandaraka exchanged
greetings with the Buddha and stood to one side. He looked around the
mendicant Saṅgha, who were so very silent, and said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! How the mendicant Saṅgha
has been led to practice properly by Mister Gotama! All the perfected
ones, the fully awakened Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the
mendicant Saṅgha to practice properly will at best do so like Mister
Gotama does in the
present."[1077](endnotes.xhtml_note-1077){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1077
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"That's so true, Kandaraka! That's so
true\![1078](endnotes.xhtml_note-1078){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1078
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} All the perfected ones, the fully awakened
Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the mendicant Saṅgha to
practice properly will at best do so like I do in the present.

For in this mendicant Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants, who have
ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to
be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through
enlightenment. And in this mendicant Saṅgha there are trainee mendicants
who are consistently ethical, living consistently, alert, living
alertly. They meditate with their minds firmly established in the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing
an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world."

When he had spoken, Pessa said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well described by the Buddha
are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are in order to
purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of
pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize
extinguishment.[1079](endnotes.xhtml_note-1079){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1079
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For we white-clothed laypeople also from
time to time meditate with our minds well established in the four kinds
of mindfulness
meditation.[1080](endnotes.xhtml_note-1080){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1080
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We meditate observing an aspect of the body
... feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How the Buddha knows what's best for
sentient beings, even though people continue to be so shady, rotten, and
tricky. For human beings are shady, sir, while the animal is obvious.
For I can drive an elephant in training, and while going back and forth
in Campā it'll try all the tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints that it
can. But my bondservants, servants, and workers behave one way by body,
another by speech, and their minds another. It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! How the Buddha knows what's best for sentient beings, even
though people continue to be so shady, rotten, and tricky. For human
beings are shady, sir, while the animal is obvious."

"That's so true, Pessa! That's so true! For human beings are shady,
while the animal is obvious. Pessa, these four people are found in the
world. What four?

1.  One person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
    mortifying
    themselves.[1081](endnotes.xhtml_note-1081){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1081
    .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
2.  One person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying
    others.
3.  One person mortifies themselves and others, committed to the
    practice of mortifying themselves and others.
4.  One person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, committed to
    the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. They live
    without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing
    bliss, with self become
    divine.[1082](endnotes.xhtml_note-1082){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1082
    .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Which one of these four people do you like the sound of?"

"Sir, I don't like the sound of the first three people. I only like the
sound of the last person, who doesn't mortify either themselves or
others."

"But why don't you like the sound of those three people?"

"Sir, the person who mortifies themselves does so even though they want
to be happy and recoil from pain. That's why I don't like the sound of
that person. The person who mortifies others does so even though others
want to be happy and recoil from pain. That's why I don't like the sound
of that person. The person who mortifies themselves and others does so
even though both themselves and others want to be happy and recoil from
pain. That's why I don't like the sound of that person. The person who
doesn't mortify either themselves or others---living without wishes,
quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine---does not
torment themselves or others, both of whom want to be happy and recoil
from pain. That's why I like the sound of that person. Well, now, sir, I
must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, Pessa, go at your convenience." And then Pessa the elephant
driver's son approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before
leaving.[1083](endnotes.xhtml_note-1083){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1083
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, not long after he had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Mendicants, Pessa the elephant driver's son is astute. He has great
wisdom. If he had sat here an hour so that I could have analyzed these
four people in detail, he would have greatly benefited. Still, even with
this much he has already greatly benefited."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! May the Buddha
analyze these four people in detail. The mendicants will listen and
remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
mortifying themselves? It's when a person goes naked, ignoring
conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called.
They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared for them,
or an invitation for a
meal.[1084](endnotes.xhtml_note-1084){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1084
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for alms,
taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven
houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a
day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once every second
day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They
live committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. They
lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. They're
devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the evening. And
so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying
and tormenting the body. This is called a person who mortifies
themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves.

And what person mortifies others, committed to the practice of
mortifying others? It's when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs,
or poultry, a hunter or trapper, a fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a
butcher, a jailer, or someone with some other kind of cruel livelihood.
This is called a person who mortifies others, being committed to the
practice of mortifying others.

And what person mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves and others? It's when a person is an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do
brahmin.[1085](endnotes.xhtml_note-1085){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1085
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has a new ceremonial hall built to the
east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a
rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. Scratching
his back with antlers, he enters the hall with his chief queen and the
brahmin high
priest.[1086](endnotes.xhtml_note-1086){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1086
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There he lies on the bare ground strewn
with
grass.[1087](endnotes.xhtml_note-1087){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1087
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The king feeds on the milk from one teat of
a cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the
milk from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk
from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is served to the
sacred flame. The calf feeds on the
remainder.[1088](endnotes.xhtml_note-1088){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1088
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He says: 'Slaughter this many bulls,
bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this
many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial
equipment!'[1089](endnotes.xhtml_note-1089){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1089
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} His bondservants, servants, and workers do
their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping with tearful
faces. This is called a person who mortifies themselves and others,
being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others.

And what person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, but lives
without wishes, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become
divine?

It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings. They give up stealing. They take only what's given,
and expect only what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving. They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. They give up lying. They speak the truth
and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't trick
the world with their words. They give up divisive speech. They don't
repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people
against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided,
supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words
that promote harmony. They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way
that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite,
likable and agreeable to the people. They give up talking nonsense.
Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching
and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable,
reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. They avoid injuring plants and
seeds. They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night
and food at the wrong time. They avoid seeing shows of dancing, singing,
and music . They avoid beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. They avoid high and luxurious beds.
They avoid receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and
girls, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs,
elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and fields and land. They avoid
running errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights,
metals, or measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity;
mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they
have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss
inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving
up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will,
they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all
living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will and malevolence. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it connected.

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.'

Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness,
they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or
pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act
out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose
to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'.

They truly understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin
of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is
the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and
seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is called a person who neither mortifies themselves or others,
being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others.
They live without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn52">

### [MN 52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Wealthy Citizen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṭṭhakanāgarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1090](endnotes.xhtml_note-1090){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1090
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Ānanda was
staying near Vesālī in the little village of
Beluva.[1091](endnotes.xhtml_note-1091){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1091
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived
at Pāṭaliputta on some
business.[1092](endnotes.xhtml_note-1092){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1092
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went to the Chicken Monastery,
approached a certain mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him,[1093](endnotes.xhtml_note-1093){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1093
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, where is Venerable Ānanda now
staying? For I want to see him."

"Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in the little
village of Beluva."

Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went
to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to
Ānanda:[1094](endnotes.xhtml_note-1094){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1094
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by
the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute
mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive
at the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke?"[1095](endnotes.xhtml_note-1095){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1095
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There is, householder."

"And what is that one thing?"

"Householder, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. Then they reflect:
'Even this first absorption is produced by choices and
intentions.'[1096](endnotes.xhtml_note-1096){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1096
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'But whatever is produced
by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.'
Abiding in that they attain the ending of
defilements.[1097](endnotes.xhtml_note-1097){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1097
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they don't attain the ending of
defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn
spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world.[1098](endnotes.xhtml_note-1098){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1098
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is one thing that has been rightly
explained by the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and
resolute mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and
they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption ...

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Then they reflect: 'Even this heart's
release by love is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand:
'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and
liable to cessation.' ...

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
... rejoicing ... equanimity ...

Furthermore, householder, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions
of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. Then they reflect: 'Even
this attainment of the dimension of infinite space is produced by
choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But whatever is produced by
choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.' ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. Then they reflect: 'Even this
attainment of the dimension of nothingness is produced by choices and
intentions.' They understand: 'But whatever is produced by choices and
intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they
attain the ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of
defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn
spontaneously because of their passion and love for that meditation.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world. This too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the
Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant's
mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the
supreme sanctuary from the
yoke."[1099](endnotes.xhtml_note-1099){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1099
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda,
"Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for an entrance to a
hidden treasure. And all at once they'd come across eleven entrances! In
the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And
all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for
cultivation.[1100](endnotes.xhtml_note-1100){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1100
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose a person had a house with eleven
doors. If the house caught fire they'd be able to flee to safety through
any one of those doors. In the same way, I'm able to flee to safety
through any one of these eleven doors to freedom from death. Sir, those
of other religions seek a fee for the tutor. Why shouldn't I make an
offering to Venerable
Ānanda?"[1101](endnotes.xhtml_note-1101){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1101
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha from Vesālī and
Pāṭaliputta, served and satisfied them with his own hands with delicious
fresh and cooked foods. He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of
garments, with a set of three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling
worth five hundred built for
Ānanda.[1102](endnotes.xhtml_note-1102){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1102
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn53">

### [MN 53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Now at that time a new town hall had recently been constructed for the
Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or
brahmin or any person at
all.[1103](endnotes.xhtml_note-1103){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1103
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, a new town hall has recently been constructed for the Sakyans of
Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or
any person at all. May the Buddha be the first to use it, and only then
will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu use it. That would be for the lasting
welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu." The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans got up from
their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on
their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread
carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil
lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
told him of their preparations, saying, "Please, sir, come at your
convenience."

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new
town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet
he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east.
The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall,
and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in
front of them. The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet,
entered the town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with
the Buddha right in front of them.

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he addressed
Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, speak about the practicing trainee to the
Sakyans of Kapilavatthu as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll
stretch it."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. And then the Buddha spread out his outer
robe folded in four and laid down in the lion's posture---on the right
side, placing one foot on top of the other---mindful and aware, and
focused on the time of getting up.

Then Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the
Sakyan:[1104](endnotes.xhtml_note-1104){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1104
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mahānāma, a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense
doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. They have
seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or
difficulty.[1105](endnotes.xhtml_note-1105){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1105
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how is a noble disciple accomplished in ethics? It's when a noble
disciple is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in
the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how
a noble disciple is ethical.

And how does a noble disciple guard the sense doors? When a noble
disciple sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how
a noble disciple guards the sense doors.

And how does a noble disciple eat in moderation? It's when a noble
disciple reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun,
indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to
avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put
an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will
have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.'
That's how a noble disciple eats in moderation.

And how is a noble disciple dedicated to wakefulness? It's when a noble
disciple practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying
their mind from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they
continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle
watch, they lie down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing
one foot on top of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the
time of getting up. In the last watch, they get up and continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from
obstacles. That's how a noble disciple is dedicated to wakefulness.

And how does a noble disciple have seven good
qualities?[1106](endnotes.xhtml_note-1106){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1106
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a noble disciple has faith in the
Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They have a conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad,
unskillful qualities.

They exercise prudence. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring
any bad, unskillful qualities.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can
remember and recall what was said and done long
ago.[1107](endnotes.xhtml_note-1107){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1107
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.
That's how a noble disciple has seven good qualities.

And how does a noble disciple get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty? It's when a noble disciple,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. That's how a
noble disciple gets the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the
present life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without
trouble or difficulty.

When a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors,
eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness; and they have seven
good qualities, and they get the four absorptions---blissful meditations
in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when they want,
without trouble or difficulty, they are called a noble disciple who is a
practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of
breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Suppose there was a chicken with eight
or ten or twelve eggs. And she properly sat on them to keep them warm
and incubated. Even if that chicken doesn't wish, 'If only my chicks
could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch
safely!' Still they can break out and hatch safely.

In the same way, when a noble disciple is practicing all these things
they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs
are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell,
becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple recollects their many kinds of past
lives.[1108](endnotes.xhtml_note-1108){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1108
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand
rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world
expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. ... And so
they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and
details. This is their first breaking out, like a chick from an
eggshell.

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees
sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. ... They understand
how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is their
second breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell.

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. This is their third breaking
out, like a chick from an eggshell.

A noble disciple's conduct includes the following: being accomplished in
ethics, guarding the sense doors, moderation in eating, being dedicated
to wakefulness, having seven good qualities, and getting the four
absorptions when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

A noble disciple's knowledge includes the following: recollecting their
past lives, clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, and realizing
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life
due to the ending of defilements.

This noble disciple is said to be 'accomplished in knowledge', and also
'accomplished in conduct', and also 'accomplished in knowledge and
conduct'.

And Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this
verse:[1109](endnotes.xhtml_note-1109){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1109
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is best among gods and humans.'

And that verse was well sung by Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung;
well spoken, not poorly spoken, beneficial, not harmful, and it was
approved by the Buddha."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda, "Good, good,
Ānanda! It's good that you spoke to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about
the practicing trainee."

This is what Venerable Ānanda said, and the teacher approved. Satisfied,
the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu approved what Venerable Ānanda said.

</article>
<article id="mn54">

### [MN 54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Potaliya the Householder ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Potaliyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Aṅguttarāpans, near the town of theirs named
Āpaṇa.[1110](endnotes.xhtml_note-1110){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1110
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Āpaṇa for alms. He wandered for alms in Āpaṇa. After the meal,
on his return from almsround, he went to a certain forest grove for the
day's meditation. Having plunged deep into it, he sat at the root of a
certain tree to meditate.

Potaliya the householder also approached that forest grove while going
for a walk. He was well dressed in sarong and cloak, with parasol and
sandals. Having plunged deep into it, he went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with
him.[1111](endnotes.xhtml_note-1111){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1111
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side, and the Buddha said to him, "There are
seats, householder. Please sit if you wish."

When he said this, Potaliya was angry and upset. Thinking, "The ascetic
Gotama addresses me as 'householder'!" he stayed silent.

For a second time ... and a third time the Buddha said to him, "There
are seats, householder. Please sit if you wish."

When he said this, Potaliya was angry and upset. Thinking, "The ascetic
Gotama addresses me as 'householder'!" he said to the Buddha, "Mister
Gotama, it is neither proper nor appropriate for you to address me as
'householder'."

"Well, householder, you have the features, attributes, and signs of a
householder."[1112](endnotes.xhtml_note-1112){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1112
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mister Gotama, it's because I have refused all work and cut off all
business."

"Householder, in what way have you refused all work and cut off all
business?"

"Mister Gotama, all the money, grain, gold, and silver I used to have
has been handed over to my children as their inheritance. And in this
matter I do not advise or reprimand them, but live with nothing more
than food and
clothes.[1113](endnotes.xhtml_note-1113){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1113
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how I have refused all work and cut
off all business."

"The cutting off of business as you describe it is one thing,
householder, but the cutting off of business in the noble one's training
is quite different."

"But what, sir, is cutting off of business in the noble one's training?
Sir, please teach me this."

"Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."[1114](endnotes.xhtml_note-1114){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1114
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," said Potaliya.

The Buddha said this:

"Householder, these eight things lead to the cutting off of business in
the noble one's
training.[1115](endnotes.xhtml_note-1115){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1115
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What eight? Killing living creatures should
be given up, relying on not killing living creatures. Stealing should be
given up, relying on not stealing. Lying should be given up, relying on
speaking the truth. Divisive speech should be given up, relying on
speech that isn't divisive. Greed and lust should be given up, relying
on not being greedy and lustful. Blaming and insulting should be given
up, relying on not blaming and not insulting. Anger and distress should
be given up, relying on not being angry and distressed. Arrogance should
be given up, relying on not being
arrogant.[1116](endnotes.xhtml_note-1116){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1116
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the eight things---stated in
brief without being analyzed in detail---that lead to the cutting off of
business in the noble one's training."

"Sir, please teach me these eight things in detail out of sympathy."

"Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," said Potaliya. The Buddha said this:

"'Killing living creatures should be given up, relying on not killing
living creatures.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? It's when a
noble disciple
reflects:[1117](endnotes.xhtml_note-1117){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1117
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I am practicing to give up and cut off the
fetters that might cause me to kill living creatures. But if I were to
kill living creatures, because of that I would reprimand myself;
sensible people, after examination, would criticize me; and when my body
breaks up, after death, I could expect to be reborn in a bad place. And
killing living creatures is itself a fetter and a hindrance. The
distressing and feverish defilements that might arise because of killing
living creatures do not occur in someone who does not kill living
creatures.' 'Killing living creatures should be given up, relying on not
killing living creatures.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it.

'Stealing ... lying ... divisive speech ... greed and lust ... blaming
and insulting ... anger and distress ...

Arrogance should be given up, relying on not being arrogant.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? It's when a noble disciple reflects:
'I am practicing to give up and cut off the fetters that might cause me
to be arrogant. But if I were to be arrogant, because of that I would
reprimand myself; sensible people, after examination, would criticize
me; and when my body breaks up, after death, I could expect to be reborn
in a bad place. And arrogance is itself a fetter and a hindrance. The
distressing and feverish defilements that might arise because of
arrogance do not occur in someone who is not arrogant.' 'Arrogance
should be given up by not being arrogant.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

These are the eight things---stated in brief and analyzed in
detail---that lead to the cutting off of business in the noble one's
training. But just this much does not constitute the cutting off of
business in each and every respect in the noble one's training."

"But, sir, how is there the cutting off of business in each and every
respect in the noble one's training? Sir, please teach me this."

"Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," said Potaliya. The Buddha said this:

#### 1. The Dangers of Sensual Pleasures {.subheading}

"Householder, suppose a dog weak with hunger was hanging around a
butcher's
shop.[1118](endnotes.xhtml_note-1118){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1118
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A deft butcher or their apprentice would
toss them a skeleton scraped clean of flesh and smeared in blood. What
do you think, householder? Gnawing on such a fleshless skeleton, would
that dog still get rid of its hunger?"

"No, sir. Why not? Because that skeleton is scraped clean of flesh and
smeared in blood. That dog will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, a noble disciple reflects: 'With the simile of a
skeleton the Buddha said that sensual pleasures give little
gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more
full of drawbacks.' Having truly seen this with right understanding,
they reject equanimity based on diversity and develop only the
equanimity based on unity, where all kinds of grasping to the worldly
pleasures of the flesh cease without anything left over.

Suppose a vulture or a crow or a hawk was to grab a scrap of meat and
fly
away.[1119](endnotes.xhtml_note-1119){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1119
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Other vultures, crows, and hawks would keep
chasing it, pecking and
clawing.[1120](endnotes.xhtml_note-1120){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1120
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you think, householder? If that
vulture, crow, or hawk doesn't quickly let go of that scrap of meat,
wouldn't that result in death or deadly suffering for them?"

"Yes, sir." ...

"Suppose a person carrying a blazing grass torch was to walk against the
wind. What do you think, householder? If that person doesn't quickly let
go of that blazing grass torch, wouldn't they burn their hands or arm or
other major or minor limb, resulting in death or deadly suffering for
them?"

"Yes, sir." ...

"Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man's height,
full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. Then a person
would come along who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to
be happy and recoils from pain. Two strong men would grab them by the
arms and drag them towards the pit of glowing coals. What do you think,
householder? Wouldn't that person writhe and struggle to and fro?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? For that person knows: 'If I fall in that pit of
glowing coals, that'd result in my death or deadly pain.'" ...

"Suppose a person was to see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus
ponds in a dream. But when they woke they couldn't see them at all. ...

Suppose a man had borrowed some goods---a gentleman's carriage and fine
jeweled earrings---and preceded and surrounded by these he proceeded
through the middle of Āpaṇa. When people saw him they'd say: 'This must
be a wealthy man! For that's how the wealthy enjoy their wealth.' But
when the owners saw him, they'd take back what was theirs. What do you
think? Would that be enough for that man to get upset?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because the owners took back what was theirs."
...

"Suppose there was a dense forest grove not far from a town or village.
And there was a tree laden with fruit, yet none of the fruit had fallen
to the ground. And along came a person in need of fruit, wandering in
search of fruit. Having plunged deep into that forest grove, they'd see
that tree laden with fruit. They'd think: 'That tree is laden with
fruit, yet none of the fruit has fallen to the ground. But I know how to
climb a tree. Why don't I climb the tree, eat as much as I like, then
fill my pouch?' And that's what they'd do. And along would come a second
person in need of fruit, wandering in search of fruit, carrying a sharp
axe. Having plunged deep into that forest grove, they'd see that tree
laden with fruit. They'd think: 'That tree is laden with fruit, yet none
of the fruit has fallen to the ground. But I don't know how to climb a
tree. Why don't I chop this tree down at the root, eat as much as I
like, then fill my pouch?' And so they'd chop the tree down at the root.
What do you think, householder? If the first person, who climbed the
tree, doesn't quickly come down, when that tree fell wouldn't they break
their hand or arm or other major or minor limb, resulting in death or
deadly suffering for them?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, a noble disciple reflects: 'With the simile of the
fruit tree the Buddha said that sensual pleasures give little
gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more
full of drawbacks.' Having truly seen this with right understanding,
they reject equanimity based on diversity and develop only the
equanimity based on unity, where all kinds of grasping to the worldly
pleasures of the flesh cease without anything left
over.[1121](endnotes.xhtml_note-1121){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1121
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple recollects their many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two,
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. ... They recollect their many kinds of past
lives, with features and details.

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees
sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. ... They understand
how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble
disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements.

That's how there is the cutting off of business in each and every
respect in the noble one's training.

What do you think, householder? Do you regard yourself as having cut off
business in a way comparable to the cutting off of business in each and
every respect in the noble one's training?"

"Who am I compared to one who has cut off business in each and every
respect in the noble one's training? I am far from that. Sir, I used to
think that the wanderers following other religions were thoroughbreds,
and I fed them and treated them accordingly, but they were not actually
thoroughbreds. I thought that the mendicants were not thoroughbreds, and
I fed them and treated them accordingly, but they actually were
thoroughbreds.[1122](endnotes.xhtml_note-1122){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1122
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But now I shall understand that the
wanderers following other religions are not actually thoroughbreds, and
I will feed them and treat them accordingly. And I shall understand that
the mendicants actually are thoroughbreds, and I will feed them and
treat them accordingly. The Buddha has inspired me to have love,
confidence, and respect for ascetics!

Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the
Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the
Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn55">

### [MN 55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Jīvaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jīvakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha in the Mango Grove of Jīvaka
Komārabhacca.[1123](endnotes.xhtml_note-1123){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1123
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Jīvaka went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to the Buddha:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'They slaughter living creatures specially for
the ascetic Gotama. The ascetic Gotama knowingly eats meat prepared on
his behalf: this is a deed he
caused.'[1124](endnotes.xhtml_note-1124){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1124
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I trust that those who say this repeat what
the Buddha has said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is
their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate
grounds for rebuttal and criticism?"

"Jīvaka, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false and untrue.

In three cases I say that meat may not be eaten: it's seen, heard, or
suspected.[1125](endnotes.xhtml_note-1125){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1125
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are three cases in which meat may not
be eaten.

In three cases I say that meat may be eaten: it's not seen, heard, or
suspected. These are three cases in which meat may be eaten.

Take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village. They
meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. A householder or their child approaches and invites them for
the next day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they want.

When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl
and robe, and approach that householder's home, where they sit on the
seat spread out. That householder or their child serves them with
delicious almsfood. It never occurs to them, 'It's so good that this
householder serves me with delicious almsfood! I hope they serve me with
such delicious almsfood in the future!' They don't think that. They eat
that almsfood untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and
understanding the escape.

What do you think, Jīvaka? At that time is that mendicant intending to
hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both?"

"No, sir."

"Aren't they eating blameless food at that time?"

"Yes, sir. Sir, I have heard that Brahmā abides in love. Now, I've seen
the Buddha with my own
eyes,[1126](endnotes.xhtml_note-1126){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1126
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and it is the Buddha who truly abides in
love."

"Any greed, hate, or delusion that might give rise to ill will has been
given up by the Realized One, cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, obliterated, and is unable to arise in the
future.[1127](endnotes.xhtml_note-1127){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1127
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that's what you were referring to, I
acknowledge it."

"That's exactly what I was referring to."

"Take the case, Jīvaka, of a mendicant living supported by a town or
village. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will. A householder or their child approaches and
invites them for the next day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they
want.

When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl
and robe, and approach that householder's home, where they sit on the
seat spread out. That householder or their child serves them with
delicious almsfood. It never occurs to them, 'It's so good that this
householder serves me with delicious almsfood! I hope they serve me with
such delicious almsfood in the future!' They don't think that. They eat
that almsfood untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and
understanding the escape.

What do you think, Jīvaka? At that time is that mendicant intending to
hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both?"

"No, sir."

"Aren't they eating blameless food at that time?"

"Yes, sir. Sir, I have heard that Brahmā abides in equanimity. Now, I've
seen the Buddha with my own eyes, and it is the Buddha who truly abides
in equanimity."

"Any greed, hate, or delusion that might give rise to cruelty,
discontent, or repulsion has been given up by the Realized One, cut off
at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and is unable to arise
in the
future.[1128](endnotes.xhtml_note-1128){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1128
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If that's what you were referring to, I
acknowledge it."

"That's exactly what I was referring to."

"Jīvaka, anyone who slaughters a living creature specially for the
Realized One or the Realized One's disciple creates much wickedness for
five reasons.

When they say: 'Go, fetch that living creature,' this is the first
reason.

When that living creature experiences pain and sadness as it's led along
by a collar, this is the second reason.

When they say: 'Go, slaughter that living creature,' this is the third
reason.

When that living creature experiences pain and sadness as it's being
slaughtered, this is the fourth reason.

When they serve the Realized One or the Realized One's disciple with
unallowable food, this is the fifth reason.

Anyone who slaughters a living creature specially for the Realized One
or the Realized One's disciple creates much wickedness for five
reasons."

When he had spoken, Jīvaka said to the Buddha: "It's incredible, sir,
it's amazing! The mendicants indeed eat allowable food. The mendicants
indeed eat blameless food. Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day
forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for
life."[1129](endnotes.xhtml_note-1129){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1129
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn56">

### [MN 56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Upāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Nāḷandā in Pāvārika's mango
grove.[1130](endnotes.xhtml_note-1130){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1130
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

At that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan was residing at Nāḷandā
together with a large assembly of Jain
ascetics.[1131](endnotes.xhtml_note-1131){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1131
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī
wandered for alms in Nāḷandā. After the meal, on his return from
almsround, he went to Pāvārika's mango grove. There he approached the
Buddha, and exchanged greetings with
him.[1132](endnotes.xhtml_note-1132){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1132
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "There are seats, Tapassī. Please sit if
you wish."

When he said this, Dīgha Tapassī took a low seat and sat to one side.
The Buddha said to him, "Tapassī, how many kinds of deed does the Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan describe for performing bad deeds?"

"Reverend Gotama, the Jain Ñātika doesn't usually speak in terms of
'deeds'. He usually speaks in terms of
'rods'."[1133](endnotes.xhtml_note-1133){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1133
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Then how many kinds of rod does the Jain Ñātika describe for performing
bad deeds?"

"The Jain Ñātika describes three kinds of rod for performing bad deeds:
the physical rod, the verbal rod, and the mental rod."

"But are these kinds of rod all distinct from each other?"

"Yes, each is quite distinct."

"Of the three rods thus analyzed and differentiated, which rod does the
Jain Ñātika describe as being the most blameworthy for performing bad
deeds: the physical rod, the verbal rod, or the mental rod?"

"The Jain Ñātika describes the physical rod as being the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental
rod."[1134](endnotes.xhtml_note-1134){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1134
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?"

"I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama."

"Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?"

"I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama."

"Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?"

"I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama."

Thus the Buddha made Dīgha Tapassī stand by this point up to the third
time.

When this was said, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Buddha, "But Reverend
Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you describe for performing bad deeds?"

"Tapassī, the Realized One doesn't usually speak in terms of 'rods'. He
usually speaks in terms of
'deeds'."[1135](endnotes.xhtml_note-1135){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1135
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Then how many kinds of deed do you describe for performing bad deeds?"

"I describe three kinds of deed for performing bad deeds: physical
deeds, verbal deeds, and mental deeds."

"But are these kinds of deed all distinct from each other?"

"Yes, each is quite distinct."

"Of the three deeds thus analyzed and differentiated, which deed do you
describe as being the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds:
physical deeds, verbal deeds, or mental deeds?"

"I describe mental deeds as being the most blameworthy for performing
bad deeds, not so much physical deeds or verbal deeds."

"Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?"

"I say mental deeds, Tapassī."

"Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?"

"I say mental deeds, Tapassī."

"Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?"

"I say mental deeds, Tapassī."

Thus the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī made the Buddha stand by this point
up to the third time, after which he got up from his seat and went to
see the Jain Ñātika.

Now at that time the Jain Ñātika was sitting together with a large
assembly of Bālaki laypeople headed by
Upāli.[1136](endnotes.xhtml_note-1136){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1136
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Jain Ñātika saw Dīgha Tapassī coming
off in the distance and said to him, "So, Tapassī, where are you coming
from in the middle of the day?"

"Just now, sir, I've come from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"But did you have some discussion with him?"

"I did."

"And what kind of discussion did you have with him?" Then Dīgha Tapassī
informed the Jain Ñātika of all they had discussed. When he had spoken,
the Jain Ñātika said to him, "Good, good, Tapassī! Dīgha Tapassī has
answered the ascetic Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly
understands their teacher's instructions. For how impressive is the
measly mental rod when compared with the solid physical rod? Rather, the
physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so
much the verbal rod or the mental rod."

When he said this, the householder Upāli said to him, "Good, sir! Well
done, Dīgha Tapassī! The Honorable Tapassī has answered the ascetic
Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly understands their teacher's
instructions. For how impressive is the measly mental rod when compared
with the solid physical rod? Rather, the physical rod is the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental rod.

I'd better go and refute the ascetic Gotama's doctrine regarding this
point. If he stands by the position that he stated to Dīgha Tapassī,
I'll take him on in debate and drag him to and fro and round about, like
a strong man would grab a fleecy sheep and drag it to and fro and round
about! Taking him on in debate, I'll drag him to and fro and round
about, like a strong brewer's worker would toss a large brewer's sieve
into a deep lake, grab it by the corners, and drag it to and fro and
round about! Taking him on in debate, I'll shake him down and about and
give him a beating, like a strong brewer's mixer would grab a strainer
by the corners and shake it down and about, and give it a beating! I'll
play a game of ear-washing with the ascetic Gotama, like a
sixty-year-old elephant would plunge into a deep lotus pond and play a
game of ear-washing! Sir, I'd better go and refute the ascetic Gotama's
doctrine on this point."

"Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama's doctrine on this point.
For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or
you."[1137](endnotes.xhtml_note-1137){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1137
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Jain Ñātika, "Sir, I don't
believe it's a good idea for the householder Upāli to rebut the ascetic
Gotama's doctrine. For the ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a
conversion magic, and uses it to convert the disciples of other
religions."

"It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become
Gotama's
disciple.[1138](endnotes.xhtml_note-1138){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1138
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible that Gotama could become
Upāli's disciple. Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama's doctrine
on this point. For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or you."

For a second time ... and a third time, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Jain
Ñātika, "Sir, I don't believe it's a good idea for the householder Upāli
to rebut the ascetic Gotama's doctrine. For the ascetic Gotama is a
magician. He knows a conversion magic, and uses it to convert the
disciples of other religions."

"It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become
Gotama's disciple. But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli's
disciple. Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama's doctrine on this
point. For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or you."

"Yes, sir," replied the householder Upāli to the Jain Ñātika. He got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled him, keeping him on his
right. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, did the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī come here?"

"He did, householder."

"But did you have some discussion with him?"

"I did."

"And what kind of discussion did you have with
him?"[1139](endnotes.xhtml_note-1139){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1139
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha informed Upāli of all they had discussed.

When he said this, the householder Upāli said to him, "Good, sir, well
done by Tapassī! The Jain ascetic Tapassī has answered the ascetic
Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly understands their teacher's
instructions. For how impressive is the measly mental rod when compared
with the solid physical rod? Rather, the physical rod is the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental rod."

"Householder, so long as you debate on the basis of truth, we can have
some discussion about this."

"I will debate on the basis of truth, sir. Let us have some discussion
about this."

"What do you think, householder? Take a Jain ascetic who is sick,
suffering, gravely ill. They reject cold water and use only hot
water.[1140](endnotes.xhtml_note-1140){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1140
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Not getting cold water, they might die.
Now, where does the Jain Ñātika say they would be reborn?"

"Sir, there are gods called 'mind-bound'. They would be reborn there.
Why is that? Because they died with mental
attachment."[1141](endnotes.xhtml_note-1141){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1141
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. But you said
that you would debate on the basis of truth."

"Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental rod."

"What do you think, householder? Take a Jain ascetic who is restrained
in all that is to be restrained, is bridled in all that is to be
restrained, has shaken off evil in all that is to be restrained, and is
curbed in all that is to be
restrained.[1142](endnotes.xhtml_note-1142){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1142
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When going out and coming back they
accidentally injure many little
creatures.[1143](endnotes.xhtml_note-1143){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1143
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, what result does the Jain Ñātika say
they would incur?"

"Sir, the Jain Ñātika says that unintentional acts are not very
blameworthy."

"But if they are intentional?"

"Then they are very blameworthy."

"But where does the Jain Ñātika say that intention is classified?"

"In the mental rod, sir."

"Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. But you said
that you would debate on the basis of truth."

"Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental rod."

"What do you think, householder? Is this Nāḷandā successful and
prosperous, populous, full of people?"

"Indeed it is, sir."

"What do you think, householder? Suppose a man were to come along with a
drawn sword and say: 'In one hour I will reduce all the living creatures
within the bounds of Nāḷandā to one heap and mass of flesh!' What do you
think, householder? Could he do that?"

"Sir, even ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty men couldn't do that.
How impressive is one measly man?"

"What do you think, householder? Suppose an ascetic or brahmin with
psychic power, who has achieved mastery of the mind, were to come along
and say: 'I will reduce Nāḷandā to ashes with a single malevolent act of
will!' What do you think, householder? Could he do that?"

"Sir, an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power, who has achieved mastery
of the mind, could reduce ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty Nāḷandās
to ashes with a single malevolent act of will. How impressive is one
measly Nāḷandā?"

"Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. But you said
that you would debate on the basis of truth."

"Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most
blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the
mental rod."

"What do you think, householder? Have you heard how the wildernesses of
Daṇḍaka, Kaliṅga, Mejjha, and Mātaṅga came to be that
way?"[1144](endnotes.xhtml_note-1144){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1144
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I have, sir."

"What have you heard?"

"I heard that it was because of a malevolent act of will by seers that
the wildernesses of Daṇḍaka, Kaliṅga, Mejjha, and Mātaṅga came to be
that way."

"Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. What
you said before and what you said after don't match up. But you said
that you would debate on the basis of truth."

"Sir, I was already delighted and satisfied by the Buddha's very first
simile.[1145](endnotes.xhtml_note-1145){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1145
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, I wanted to hear the Buddha's
various solutions to the problem, so I thought I'd oppose you in this
way.

Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the
Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the
Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

"Householder, you should act after careful consideration. It's good for
well-known people such as yourself to act after careful
consideration."[1146](endnotes.xhtml_note-1146){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1146
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Now I'm even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he
tells me to act after careful consideration. For if the followers of
other religions were to gain me as a disciple, they'd carry a banner all
over Nāḷandā, saying: 'The householder Upāli has become our disciple!'
And yet the Buddha says: 'Householder, you should act after careful
consideration. It's good for well-known people such as yourself to act
after careful consideration.'

For a second time, I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and
to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"For a long time now, householder, your family has been a well-spring of
support for the Jain ascetics. You should consider giving to them when
they come."

"Now I'm even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he
tells me to consider giving to the Jain ascetics when they come. I have
heard, sir, that the ascetic Gotama says this: 'Gifts should only be
given to me, not to
others.[1147](endnotes.xhtml_note-1147){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1147
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Gifts should only be given to my disciples,
not to the disciples of others. Only what is given to me is very
fruitful, not what is given to others. Only what is given to my
disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of
others.' Yet the Buddha encourages me to give to the Jain ascetics.
Well, sir, we'll know the proper time for that.

For a third time, I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to
the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as
a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

Then the Buddha taught the householder Upāli step by step, with a talk
on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of
sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of
renunciation. And when he knew that Upāli's mind was ready, pliable, rid
of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the special teaching
of the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just
as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very
seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in Upāli:
"Everything that has a beginning has an end." Then Upāli saw, attained,
understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went beyond doubt, got rid of
indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others regarding
the Teacher's instructions.

He said to the Buddha, "Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties,
and much to do."

"Please, householder, go at your convenience."

And then the householder Upāli approved and agreed with what the Buddha
said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went back to his own home,
where he addressed the gatekeeper, "My good gatekeeper, from this day
forth close the gate to Jain monks and nuns, and open it for the
Buddha's monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If any Jain ascetics come,
say this to them: 'Wait, sir, do not
enter.[1148](endnotes.xhtml_note-1148){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1148
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From now on the householder Upāli has
become a disciple of the ascetic Gotama. His gate is closed to Jain
monks and nuns, and opened for the Buddha's monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen. If you require almsfood, wait here, they will bring it to
you.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the gatekeeper.

Dīgha Tapassī heard that Upāli had become a disciple of the ascetic
Gotama. He went to the Jain Ñātika and said to him, "Sir, they say that
the householder Upāli has become a disciple of the ascetic Gotama."

"It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become
Gotama's disciple. But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli's
disciple."

For a second time ... and a third time, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Jain
Ñātika, "Sir, they say that the householder Upāli has become a disciple
of the ascetic Gotama."

"It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become
Gotama's disciple. But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli's
disciple."

"Well, sir, I'd better go and find out whether or not Upāli has become
Gotama's disciple."

"Go, Tapassī, and find out whether or not Upāli has become Gotama's
disciple."

Then Dīgha Tapassī went to Upāli's home. The gatekeeper saw him coming
off in the distance and said to him, "Wait, sir, do not enter. From now
on the householder Upāli has become a disciple of the ascetic Gotama.
His gate is closed to Jain monks and nuns, and opened for the Buddha's
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If you require almsfood, wait here,
they will bring it to you."

Saying, "No, mister, I do not require almsfood," he turned back and went
to the Jain Ñātika and said to him, "Sir, it's really true that Upāli
has become Gotama's disciple. Sir, I couldn't get you to accept that it
wasn't a good idea for the householder Upāli to rebut the ascetic
Gotama's doctrine. For the ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a
conversion magic, and uses it to convert the disciples of other
religions. The householder Upāli has been converted by the ascetic
Gotama's conversion magic!"

"It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become
Gotama's disciple. But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli's
disciple."

For a second time ... and a third time, Dīgha Tapassī told the Jain
Ñātika that it was really true.

"It is impossible ...

Well, Tapassī, I'd better go and find out for myself whether or not
Upāli has become Gotama's disciple."

Then the Jain Ñātika went to Upāli's home together with a large
following of Jain ascetics. The gatekeeper saw him coming off in the
distance and said to him: "Wait, sir, do not enter. From now on the
householder Upāli has become a disciple of the ascetic Gotama. His gate
is closed to Jain monks and nuns, and opened for the Buddha's monks,
nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If you require almsfood, wait here, they
will bring it to you."

"Well then, my good gatekeeper, go to Upāli and say: 'Sir, the Jain
Ñātika is waiting outside the gates together with a large following of
Jain ascetics. He wishes to see you.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the gatekeeper. He went to Upāli and relayed what
was said. Upāli said to him, "Well, then, my good gatekeeper, prepare
seats in the hall of the middle gate."

"Yes, sir," replied the gatekeeper. He did as he was asked, then
returned to Upāli and said, "Sir, seats have been prepared in the hall
of the middle gate. Please go at your convenience."

Then Upāli went to the hall of the middle gate, where he sat on the
highest and finest seat. He addressed the gatekeeper, "Well then, my
good gatekeeper, go to the Jain Ñātika and say to him: 'Sir, Upāli says
you may enter if you wish.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the gatekeeper. He went to the Jain Ñātika and
relayed what was said.

Then the Jain Ñātika went to the hall of the middle gate together with a
large following of Jain ascetics. Previously, when Upāli saw the Jain
Ñātika coming, he would go out to greet him and, having wiped off the
highest and finest seat with his upper robe, he would embrace him and
sit him
down.[1149](endnotes.xhtml_note-1149){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1149
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But today, having seated himself on the
highest and finest seat, he said to the Jain Ñātika, "There are seats,
sir. Please sit if you wish."

When he said this, the Jain Ñātika said to him: "You're mad,
householder! You're a moron! You said: 'I'll go and refute the ascetic
Gotama's doctrine.' But you come back caught in the vast net of his
doctrine. Suppose a man went to deliver a pair of testicles, but came
back castrated. Or they went to deliver eyes, but came back blinded. In
the same way, you said: 'I'll go and refute the ascetic Gotama's
doctrine.' But you come back caught in the vast net of his doctrine.
You've been converted by the ascetic Gotama's conversion magic!"

"Sir, this conversion magic is excellent. This conversion magic is
lovely! If my loved ones---relatives and kin---were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If the whole
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---were to be converted by this,
it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. Well then, sir, I
shall give you a simile. For by means of a simile some sensible people
understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time there was an old brahmin, elderly and senior. His wife
was a young brahmin lady who was pregnant and about to give
birth.[1150](endnotes.xhtml_note-1150){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1150
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then she said to the brahmin, 'Go, brahmin,
buy a baby monkey from the market and bring it back so it can be a
playmate for my
child.'[1151](endnotes.xhtml_note-1151){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1151
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When she said this, the brahmin said to her, 'Wait, my dear, until you
give birth. If your child is a boy, I'll buy you a male monkey, but if
it's a girl, I'll buy a female monkey.'

For a second time, and a third time she said to the brahmin, 'Go,
brahmin, buy a baby monkey from the market and bring it back so it can
be a playmate for my child.'

Then that brahmin, because of his love for the brahmin lady, bought a
male baby monkey at the market, brought it to her, and said, 'I've
bought this male baby monkey for you so it can be a playmate for your
child.'

When he said this, she said to him, 'Go, brahmin, take this monkey to
Rattapāṇi the dyer and say, "Mister Rattapāṇi, I wish to have this
monkey dyed the color of yellow greasepaint, pounded and re-pounded, and
pressed on both sides."'

Then that brahmin, because of his love for the brahmin lady, took the
monkey to Rattapāṇi the dyer and said, 'Mister Rattapāṇi, I wish to have
this monkey dyed the color of yellow greasepaint, pounded and
re-pounded, and pressed on both sides.'

When he said this, Rattapāṇi said to him, 'Sir, this monkey can
withstand a dying, but not a pounding or a pressing.'

In the same way, the doctrine of the foolish Jains looks fine
initially---for fools, not for the astute---but can't withstand being
scrutinized or pressed.

Then some time later that brahmin took a new pair of garments to
Rattapāṇi the dyer and said, 'Mister Rattapāṇi, I wish to have this new
pair of garments dyed the color of yellow greasepaint, pounded and
re-pounded, and pressed on both sides.'

When he said this, Rattapāṇi said to him, 'Sir, this pair of garments
can withstand a dying, a pounding, and a pressing.'

In the same way, the doctrine of the Buddha looks fine initially---for
the astute, not for fools---and it can withstand being scrutinized and
pressed."

"Householder, the king and his retinue know you as a disciple of the
Jain Ñātika. Whose disciple should we remember you as?"

When he had spoken, the householder Upāli got up from his seat, arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms in the direction of
the Buddha, and said to the Jain Ñātika, "Well then, sir, hear whose
disciple I am:

> The wise one, free of delusion,\
> with hard-heartedness dissolved, victor in
> battle;[1152](endnotes.xhtml_note-1152){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1152
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's untroubled and very even-minded,\
> with the virtue of an elder and the wisdom of a saint,\
> immaculate in the midst of it
> all:[1153](endnotes.xhtml_note-1153){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1153
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He has no indecision, he's content,\
> joyful, he has spat out the world's bait;\
> he has completed the ascetic's task as a human,\
> a man who bears his final body;\
> he's beyond compare, he's stainless:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He's free of doubt, he's skillful,\
> he's a trainer, an excellent charioteer;\
> supreme, with brilliant qualities,\
> confident, his light shines forth;\
> he has cut off conceit, he's a hero:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> The chief bull, immeasurable,\
> profound, sagacious;\
> he is the maker of sanctuary, knowledgeable,\
> firm in principle and restrained;\
> he has slipped his chains and is liberated:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He's a giant, living remotely,\
> he's ended the fetters and is liberated;\
> he's skilled in debate and cleansed,\
> with banner lowered,
> desireless;[1154](endnotes.xhtml_note-1154){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1154
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's tamed, and doesn't proliferate:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He is the seventh sage, free of
> deceit,[1155](endnotes.xhtml_note-1155){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1155
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> with three knowledges, he has attained to divinity,\
> he has bathed, he knows
> philology,[1156](endnotes.xhtml_note-1156){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1156
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's tranquil, he understands what is known;\
> he is Sakka the Able, Purindada the
> Firstgiver:[1157](endnotes.xhtml_note-1157){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1157
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> The noble one, evolved,\
> he has attained the goal and explains it;\
> he is mindful, discerning,\
> neither leaning forward nor pulling
> back,[1158](endnotes.xhtml_note-1158){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1158
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> he's unstirred, attained to mastery:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> Transcendent, he practices
> absorption,[1159](endnotes.xhtml_note-1159){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1159
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> no inner thoughts arising, he is
> pure,[1160](endnotes.xhtml_note-1160){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1160
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> independent and
> fearless;[1161](endnotes.xhtml_note-1161){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1161
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> secluded, he has reached the peak,\
> crossed over, he helps others across:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He's peaceful, his wisdom is vast,\
> with great wisdom, he's free of greed;\
> he is the Realized One, the Holy One,\
> unrivaled, unequaled,\
> assured, and subtle:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple.
>
> He has cut off craving and is awakened,\
> free of fuming, unsullied;\
> a mighty spirit worthy of
> offerings,[1162](endnotes.xhtml_note-1162){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1162
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> best of men, inestimable,\
> grand, he has reached the peak of glory:\
> he is the Buddha, and I am his disciple."

"But when did you compose these praises of the ascetic Gotama's
beautiful qualities,
householder?"[1163](endnotes.xhtml_note-1163){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1163
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, suppose there was a large heap of many different flowers. A deft
garland-maker or their apprentice could tie them into a colorful
garland. In the same way, the Buddha has many beautiful qualities to
praise, many hundreds of such
qualities.[1164](endnotes.xhtml_note-1164){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1164
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Who, sir, would not praise the
praiseworthy?"

Unable to bear this honor paid to the Buddha, the Jain Ñātika spewed hot
blood from his mouth there and
then.[1165](endnotes.xhtml_note-1165){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1165
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn57">

### [MN 57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ascetic Who Behaved Like a Dog ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kukkuravatikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Koliyans, where they have a town named
Haliddavasana.[1166](endnotes.xhtml_note-1166){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1166
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Puṇṇa the Koliyan, a cow votary, and the naked ascetic Seniya, a
dog votary, went to see the Buddha. Puṇṇa bowed to the Buddha and sat
down to one side, while Seniya exchanged greetings and polite
conversation with him before sitting down to one side curled up like a
dog.[1167](endnotes.xhtml_note-1167){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1167
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Puṇṇa said to the Buddha, "Sir, this naked ascetic Seniya the dog votary
does a hard thing: he eats food placed on the ground. For a long time he
has undertaken that observance to behave like a dog. Where will he be
reborn in his next life?"

"Enough, Puṇṇa, let it be. Don't ask me
that."[1168](endnotes.xhtml_note-1168){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1168
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time ... and a third time, Puṇṇa said to the Buddha, "Sir,
this naked ascetic Seniya does a hard thing: he eats food placed on the
ground. For a long time he has undertaken that observance to behave like
a dog. Where will he be reborn in his next life?"

"Clearly, Puṇṇa, I'm not getting through to you when I say: 'Enough,
Puṇṇa, let it be. Don't ask me that.' Nevertheless, I will answer you.

Take someone who develops the dog observance fully and uninterruptedly.
They develop a dog's ethics, a dog's mentality, and a dog's behavior
fully and uninterruptedly. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of dogs. But if they have such a view: 'By
this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I
become one of the gods!' This is their wrong view. An individual with
wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: hell or the animal
realm. So if the dog observance succeeds it leads to rebirth in the
company of dogs, but if it fails it leads to hell."

When he said this, Seniya cried and burst out in tears.

The Buddha said to Puṇṇa, "This is what I didn't get through to you when
I said: 'Enough, Puṇṇa, let it be. Don't ask me that.'"

Seniya said, "Sir, I'm not crying because of what the Buddha said. But,
sir, for a long time I have undertaken this observance to behave like a
dog. Sir, this Puṇṇa is a cow votary. For a long time he has undertaken
that observance to behave like a
cow.[1169](endnotes.xhtml_note-1169){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1169
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Where will he be reborn in his next life?"

"Enough, Seniya, let it be. Don't ask me that."

For a second time ... and a third time Seniya said to the Buddha, "Sir,
this Puṇṇa is a cow votary. For a long time he has undertaken that
observance to behave like a cow. Where will he be reborn in his next
life?"

"Clearly, Seniya, I'm not getting through to you when I say: 'Enough,
Seniya, let it be. Don't ask me that.' Nevertheless, I will answer you.

Take someone who develops the cow observance fully and uninterruptedly.
They develop a cow's ethics, a cow's mentality, and a cow's behavior
fully and uninterruptedly. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of
cows.[1170](endnotes.xhtml_note-1170){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1170
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if they have such a view: 'By this
precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I
become one of the gods!' This is their wrong view. An individual with
wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: hell or the animal
realm. So if the cow observance succeeds it leads to rebirth in the
company of cows, but if it fails it leads to hell."

When he said this, Puṇṇa cried and burst out in tears.

The Buddha said to Seniya, "This is what I didn't get through to you
when I said: 'Enough, Seniya, let it be. Don't ask me that.'"

Puṇṇa said, "Sir, I'm not crying because of what the Buddha said. But,
sir, for a long time I have undertaken this observance to behave like a
cow. I am quite confident that the Buddha is capable of teaching me so
that I can give up this cow observance, and the naked ascetic Seniya can
give up that dog observance."

"Well then, Puṇṇa, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," he replied. The Buddha said this:

"Puṇṇa, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them with
my own
insight.[1171](endnotes.xhtml_note-1171){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1171
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results;
    and[1172](endnotes.xhtml_note-1172){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1172
    .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of
    deeds.[1173](endnotes.xhtml_note-1173){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1173
    .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they're reborn in a hurtful world, where hurtful contacts
strike them. Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful
feelings that are exclusively painful---like the beings in hell. This is
how a being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth,
and when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that
sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. These are called dark deeds
with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they are reborn in a pleasing world, where pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing
feelings that are exclusively happy---like the gods of universal beauty.
This is how a being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your
rebirth, and when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say
that sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. These are called bright
deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world
that is both hurtful and pleasing, where hurtful and pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they
experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of
pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is how a being is born from a being. For what you do
brings about your rebirth, and when you're reborn contacts strike you.
This is why I say that sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. These
are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

When he had spoken, Puṇṇa the Koliyan said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

And Seniya the naked ascetic said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! ... I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to
the mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination
in the Buddha's
presence?"[1174](endnotes.xhtml_note-1174){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1174
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Seniya, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the
going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into
monkhood.[1175](endnotes.xhtml_note-1175){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1175
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} However, I have recognized individual
differences in this
matter."[1176](endnotes.xhtml_note-1176){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1176
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

And the naked ascetic Seniya received the going forth, the ordination in
the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable Seniya,
living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the
supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Seniya became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="mn58">

### [MN 58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Prince Abhaya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhayarājakumārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.[1177](endnotes.xhtml_note-1177){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1177
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Prince Abhaya went up to the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Jain Ñātika said to
him,[1178](endnotes.xhtml_note-1178){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1178
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Come, prince, refute the ascetic Gotama's
doctrine. Then you will get a good reputation: 'Prince Abhaya refuted
the doctrine of the ascetic Gotama, so mighty and powerful!'"

"But sir, how am I to do this?"

"Here, prince, go to the ascetic Gotama and say to him: 'Sir, may the
Realized One utter speech that is disliked by
others?'[1179](endnotes.xhtml_note-1179){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1179
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he's asked this, if he answers: 'He
may, prince,' say this to him, 'Then, sir, what exactly is the
difference between you and an ordinary
person?[1180](endnotes.xhtml_note-1180){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1180
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For even an ordinary person may utter
speech that is disliked by others.' But if he answers, 'He may not,
prince,' say this to him: 'Then, sir, why exactly did you declare of
Devadatta: "Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to hell, there to
remain for an eon,
irredeemable"?[1181](endnotes.xhtml_note-1181){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1181
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Devadatta was angry and upset with what you
said.'

When you put this dilemma to him, the Buddha won't be able to either
spit it out or swallow it down. He'll be like a man with an iron cross
stuck in his throat, unable to either spit it out or swallow it down."

"Yes, sir," replied Abhaya. He got up from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Jain Ñātika, keeping him on his right. Then he
went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.

Then he looked up at the sun and thought, "It's too late to refute the
Buddha's doctrine today. I shall refute his doctrine in my own home
tomorrow." He said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha please accept
tomorrow's meal from me, together with three other monks." The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Abhaya got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving.

Then when the night had passed, the Buddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went to Abhaya's home, and sat down on the
seat spread out. Then Abhaya served and satisfied the Buddha with his
own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Abhaya took a
low seat, sat to one side, and said to him, "Sir, may the Realized One
utter speech that is disliked by others?"

"This matter is not categorical,
prince."[1182](endnotes.xhtml_note-1182){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1182
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Then the Jains have lost in this, sir."

"But prince, why do you say that the Jains have lost in this?"

Then Abhaya told the Buddha all that had happened.

Now at that time a little baby boy was sitting in Prince Abhaya's lap.
Then the Buddha said to Abhaya, "What do you think, prince? If---because
of your negligence or his nursemaid's negligence---your boy were to put
a stick or stone in his mouth, what would you do to him?"

"I'd try to take it out, sir. If that didn't work, I'd cradle his head
with my left hand and take it out using a hooked finger of my right
hand, even if it drew blood. Why is that? Because I have sympathy for
the boy, sir."

"In the same way, prince, the Realized One does not utter speech that he
knows to be untrue, false, and pointless, and which is disliked by
others. The Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be true
and correct, but which is harmful and disliked by others. The Realized
One knows the right time to speak so as to explain what he knows to be
true, correct, and beneficial, but which is disliked by
others.[1183](endnotes.xhtml_note-1183){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1183
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Realized One does not utter speech that
he knows to be untrue, false, and pointless, but which is liked by
others. The Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be true
and correct, but which is harmful, even if it is liked by others. The
Realized One knows the right time to speak so as to explain what he
knows to be true, correct, and beneficial, and which is liked by others.
Why is that? Because the Realized One has sympathy for sentient
beings."[1184](endnotes.xhtml_note-1184){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1184
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, there are clever aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics
who come to see you with a question already planned. Do you think
beforehand that if they ask you like this, you'll answer like that, or
does the answer just strike you on the spot?"

"Well then, prince, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, prince? Are you skilled in the
various parts of a chariot?"

"I am, sir."

"What do you think, prince? When they come to you and ask: 'What's the
name of this chariot part?' Do you think beforehand that if they ask you
like this, you'll answer like that, or does the answer appear to you on
the spot?"

"Sir, I'm well-known as a charioteer skilled in a chariot's parts. All
the major and minor parts are well-known to me. The answer just appears
to me on the spot."

"In the same way, when clever aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics come to see me with a question already planned, the answer just
strikes me on the spot. Why is that? Because the Realized One has
clearly comprehended the principle of the teachings, so that the answer
just strikes him on the spot."

When he had spoken, Prince Abhaya said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn59">

### [MN 59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Many Kinds of Feeling ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahuvedanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the chamberlain Pañcakaṅga went up to Venerable Udāyī, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to
him,[1185](endnotes.xhtml_note-1185){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1185
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, how many feelings has the Buddha
spoken of?"

"Chamberlain, the Buddha has spoken of three feelings: pleasant,
painful, and neutral. The Buddha has spoken of these three feelings."

When he said this, Pañcakaṅga said to Udāyī, "Sir, Udāyī, the Buddha
hasn't spoken of three feelings. He's spoken of two feelings: pleasant
and painful. The Buddha said that neutral feeling is included as a
peaceful and subtle kind of pleasure."

For a second time, Udāyī said to Pañcakaṅga, "The Buddha hasn't spoken
of two feelings, he's spoken of three." For a second time, Pañcakaṅga
said to Udāyī, "The Buddha hasn't spoken of three feelings, he's spoken
of two."

And for a third time, Udāyī said to Pañcakaṅga, "The Buddha hasn't
spoken of two feelings, he's spoken of three."

And for a third time, Pañcakaṅga said to Udāyī, "The Buddha hasn't
spoken of three feelings, he's spoken of two."

But neither was able to persuade the other.

Venerable Ānanda heard this discussion between Udāyī and Pañcakaṅga.
Then he went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed
the Buddha of all they had discussed. When he had spoken, the Buddha
said to him,

"Ānanda, the explanation by the mendicant Udāyī, which the chamberlain
Pañcakaṅga didn't agree with, was quite correct. But the explanation by
Pañcakaṅga, which Udāyī didn't agree with, was also quite
correct.[1186](endnotes.xhtml_note-1186){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1186
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In one explanation I've spoken of two
feelings. In another explanation I've spoken of three feelings, or five,
six, eighteen, thirty-six, or a hundred and eight
feelings.[1187](endnotes.xhtml_note-1187){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1187
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I've explained the teaching in all these
different ways. This being so, you can expect that those who don't
concede, approve, or agree with what has been well spoken will argue,
quarrel, and fight, continually wounding each other with barbed words.
I've explained the teaching in all these different ways. This being so,
you can expect that those who do concede, approve, or agree with what
has been well spoken will live in harmony, appreciating each other,
without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each
other with kindly eyes.

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights
known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the
nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which
are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.
These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The pleasure and
happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is
called sensual pleasure.

There are those who would say that this is the highest pleasure and
happiness that sentient beings experience. But I don't grant them that.
Why is that? Because there is another pleasure that is finer than
that.[1188](endnotes.xhtml_note-1188){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1188
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is that pleasure? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. This is a pleasure that is finer than that.

There are those who would say that this is the highest pleasure and
happiness that sentient beings experience. But I don't grant them that.
Why is that? Because there is another pleasure that is finer than that.
And what is that pleasure? It's when, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. ...

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters
and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' ...

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.
...[1189](endnotes.xhtml_note-1189){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1189
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. ...

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ...

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and
remains in the dimension of nothingness. ...

There is another pleasure that is finer than that. And what is that
pleasure? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. This is a pleasure that is finer than that.

There are those who would say that this is the highest pleasure and
happiness that sentient beings experience. But I don't grant them that.
Why is that? Because there is another pleasure that is finer than that.
And what is that pleasure? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and
remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is a pleasure
that is finer than
that.[1190](endnotes.xhtml_note-1190){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1190
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetic
Gotama spoke of the cessation of perception and feeling, and he includes
it in happiness. What's up with that?'

When wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them,
'Reverends, when the Buddha describes what's included in happiness, he's
not just referring to pleasant feeling. The Realized One describes
pleasure as included in happiness wherever it is found, and in whatever
context.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn60">

### [MN 60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unfailing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Apaṇṇakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1191](endnotes.xhtml_note-1191){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1191
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Sālā.[1192](endnotes.xhtml_note-1192){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1192
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā,
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before
sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and
polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha,
some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The Buddha
said to them:

"So, householders, is there any teacher you're happy with, in whom you
have acquired grounded
faith?"[1193](endnotes.xhtml_note-1193){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1193
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Since you haven't found a teacher you're happy with, you should
undertake and implement this unfailing
teaching.[1194](endnotes.xhtml_note-1194){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1194
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For when the unfailing teaching is
undertaken, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. And what
is the unfailing teaching?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such
thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And
there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly
practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their
own
insight.'[1195](endnotes.xhtml_note-1195){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1195
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly
contradicts this. They say: 'There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and
offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is
an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings
that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who
are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the
afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'[1196](endnotes.xhtml_note-1196){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1196
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, householders? Don't these doctrines directly
contradict each other?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that there's no meaning in giving, etc. You can expect that they will
reject good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and
implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. Why is that?
Because those ascetics and brahmins don't see that unskillful qualities
are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful
qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation.

Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there
is no other world is wrong view. Since there actually is another world,
their thought that there is no other world is wrong thought. Since there
actually is another world, their speech that there is no other world is
wrong speech. Since there actually is another world, in saying that
there is no other world they contradict those perfected ones who know
the other world. Since there actually is another world, in convincing
another that there is no other world they are convincing them to accept
an untrue teaching. And on account of that they glorify themselves and
put others down. So they give up their former ethical conduct and are
established in unethical conduct. And that is how these many bad,
unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition---wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones,
convincing others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and
putting others down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is no
other world, when this individual's body breaks up they will keep
themselves
safe.[1197](endnotes.xhtml_note-1197){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1197
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And if there is another world, when their
body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. But let us grant that those who say
that there is no other world are
correct.[1198](endnotes.xhtml_note-1198){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1198
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Regardless, that individual is still
criticized by sensible people in the present life as being an immoral
individual of wrong view, a
nihilist.'[1199](endnotes.xhtml_note-1199){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1199
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if there really is another world, they
hold a losing hand on both
counts.[1200](endnotes.xhtml_note-1200){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1200
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For they are criticized by sensible people
in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they
will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
They have wrongly undertaken this unfailing teaching in such a way that
it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the
skillful
premise.[1201](endnotes.xhtml_note-1201){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1201
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that there is meaning in giving, etc. You can expect that they will
reject bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and
implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. Why is that?
Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are
full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful
qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation.

Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there
is another world is right view. Since there actually is another world,
their thought that there is another world is right thought. Since there
actually is another world, their speech that there is another world is
right speech. Since there actually is another world, in saying that
there is another world they don't contradict those perfected ones who
know the other world. Since there actually is another world, in
convincing another that there is another world they are convincing them
to accept a true teaching. And on account of that they don't glorify
themselves or put others down. So they give up their former unethical
conduct and are established in ethical conduct. And that is how these
many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition---right
view, right thought, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones,
convincing others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself
or putting others down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is
another world, when this individual's body breaks up, after death, they
will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. But let us grant that
those who say that there is no other world are correct. Regardless, that
individual is still praised by sensible people in the present life as
being a moral individual of right view, who affirms a positive
teaching.' So if there really is another world, they hold a perfect hand
on both
counts.[1202](endnotes.xhtml_note-1202){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1202
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For they are praised by sensible people in
the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will
be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. They have rightly
undertaken this unfailing teaching in such a way that it encompasses the
positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'The one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate,
torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to
do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into
houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway
robbery, commit adultery, and
lie.[1203](endnotes.xhtml_note-1203){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1203
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you were to reduce all the living
creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged
chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were to
go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and
torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that,
and no outcome of evil. If you were to go along the north bank of the
Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no
merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. In giving, self-control,
restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.'

And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly
contradicts this. They say: 'The one who acts does a bad deed when they
punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they
encourage others to do the same. They do a bad deed when they kill,
steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings,
commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. If you were to reduce
all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh
with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil.
If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing,
mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil
comes of that, and an outcome of evil. If you were to go along the north
bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do
the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. In giving,
self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of
merit.'

What do you think, householders? Don't these doctrines directly
contradict each other?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, etc. You can
expect that they will reject good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech,
and mind. Why is that? Because those ascetics and brahmins don't see
that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and
corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing
power of renunciation.

Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that
action is ineffective is wrong view. Since action actually does have an
effect, their thought that action is ineffective is wrong thought. Since
action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is
ineffective is wrong speech. Since action actually does have an effect,
in saying that action is ineffective they contradict those perfected
ones who teach that action is effective. Since action actually does have
an effect, in convincing another that action is ineffective they are
convincing them to accept an untrue teaching. And on account of that
they glorify themselves and put others down. So they give up their
former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. And
that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong
view as condition---wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech,
contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept untrue
teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is no
effective action, when this individual's body breaks up they will keep
themselves safe. And if there is effective action, when their body
breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. But let us grant that those who say that
there is no effective action are correct. Regardless, that individual is
still criticized by sensible people in the present life as being an
immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies the efficacy of
action.'[1204](endnotes.xhtml_note-1204){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1204
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if there really is effective action,
they hold a losing hand on both counts. For they are criticized by
sensible people in the present life, and when their body breaks up,
after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. They have wrongly undertaken this unfailing teaching
in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side
only, leaving out the skillful premise.

Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that the one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, etc. You can
expect that they will reject bad conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech,
and mind. Why is that? Because those ascetics and brahmins see that
unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption,
and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of
renunciation.

Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that
action is effective is right view. Since action actually does have an
effect, their thought that action is effective is right thought. Since
action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is
effective is right speech. Since action actually does have an effect, in
saying that action is effective they don't contradict those perfected
ones who teach that action is effective. Since action actually does have
an effect, in convincing another that action is effective they are
convincing them to accept a true teaching. And on account of that they
don't glorify themselves or put others down. So they give up their
former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. And
that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as
condition---right view, right thought, right speech, not contradicting
the noble ones, convincing others to accept true teachings, and not
glorifying oneself or putting others down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is
effective action, when this individual's body breaks up, after death,
they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. But let us grant
that those who say that there is no effective action are correct.
Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in the
present life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms the
efficacy of action.' So if there really is effective action, they hold a
perfect hand on both counts. For they are praised by sensible people in
the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will
be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. They have rightly
undertaken this unfailing teaching in such a way that it encompasses the
positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'There is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient
beings.[1205](endnotes.xhtml_note-1205){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1205
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sentient beings are corrupted without cause
or reason. There's no cause or reason for the purification of sentient
beings. Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. There is
no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. All sentient beings,
all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and
energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience
pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.'

And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly
contradicts this. They say: 'There is a cause and reason for the
corruption of sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted with cause
and reason. There is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient
beings. Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason. There is
power, energy, human strength and vigor. It is not the case that all
sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack
control, power, and energy, or that, molded by destiny, circumstance,
and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of
rebirth.'

What do you think, householders? Don't these doctrines directly
contradict each other?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that there's no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings,
etc. You can expect that they will reject good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of
body, speech, and mind. Why is that? Because those ascetics and brahmins
don't see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness,
and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and
cleansing power of renunciation.

Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is no
causality is wrong view. Since there actually is causality, their
thought that there is no causality is wrong thought. Since there
actually is causality, their speech that there is no causality is wrong
speech. Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is no
causality they contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is
causality. Since there actually is causality, in convincing another that
there is no causality they are convincing them to accept an untrue
teaching. And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others
down. So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established
in unethical conduct. And that is how these many bad, unskillful
qualities come to be with wrong view as condition---wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, convincing others
to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others
down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is no
causality, when this individual's body breaks up they will keep
themselves safe. And if there is causality, when their body breaks up,
after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But let us grant that those who say that there is no
causality are correct. Regardless, that individual is still criticized
by sensible people in the present life as being an immoral individual of
wrong view, one who denies
causality.'[1206](endnotes.xhtml_note-1206){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1206
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if there really is causality, they hold
a losing hand on both counts. For they are criticized by sensible people
in the present life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they
will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
They have wrongly undertaken this unfailing teaching in such a way that
it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the
skillful premise.

Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that there is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings,
etc. You can expect that they will reject bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of
body, speech, and mind. Why is that? Because those ascetics and brahmins
see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and
corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing
power of renunciation.

Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is
causality is right view. Since there actually is causality, their
thought that there is causality is right thought. Since there actually
is causality, their speech that there is causality is right speech.
Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is causality
they don't contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is
causality. Since there actually is causality, in convincing another that
there is causality they are convincing them to accept a true teaching.
And on account of that they don't glorify themselves or put others down.
So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in
ethical conduct. And that is how these many skillful qualities come to
be with right view as condition---right view, right thought, right
speech, not contradicting the noble ones, convincing others to accept
true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'If there is
causality, when this individual's body breaks up, after death, they will
be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. But let us grant that those
who say that there is no causality are correct. Regardless, that
individual is still praised by sensible people in the present life as
being a moral individual of right view, who affirms causality.' So if
there really is causality, they hold a perfect hand on both counts. For
they are praised by sensible people in the present life, and when their
body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. They have rightly undertaken this unfailing teaching in
such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides,
leaving out the unskillful premise.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'There are no totally formless states of
meditation.'[1207](endnotes.xhtml_note-1207){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1207
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly
contradicts this. They say: 'There are totally formless states of
meditation.'

What do you think, householders? Don't these doctrines directly
contradict each other?"

"Yes, sir."

"A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'Some ascetics
and brahmins say that there are no totally formless meditations, but I
have not seen that. Some ascetics and brahmins say that there are
totally formless meditations, but I have not known that. Without knowing
or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and
declare, 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' If those
ascetics and brahmins who say that there are no totally formless
meditations are correct, it is possible that I will be unfailingly
reborn among the gods who possess form and made of mind. If those
ascetics and brahmins who say that there are totally formless
meditations are correct, it is possible that I will be unfailingly
reborn among the gods who are formless and made of perception. Now,
owing to form, bad things are seen: taking up the rod and the sword,
quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and
lies. But those things don't exist where it is totally formless.'
Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment,
dispassion, and cessation regarding forms.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'There is no such thing as the total cessation of continued
existence.'[1208](endnotes.xhtml_note-1208){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1208
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly
contradicts this. They say: 'There is such a thing as the total
cessation of continued existence.'

What do you think, householders? Don't these doctrines directly
contradict each other?"

"Yes, sir."

"A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'Some ascetics
and brahmins say that there is no such thing as the total cessation of
continued existence, but I have not seen that. Some ascetics and
brahmins say that there is such a thing as the total cessation of
continued existence, but I have not known that. Without knowing or
seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare,
'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' If those ascetics and
brahmins who say that there is no such thing as the total cessation of
continued existence are correct, it is possible that I will be
unfailingly reborn among the gods who are formless and made of
perception. If those ascetics and brahmins who say that there is such a
thing as the total cessation of continued existence are correct, it is
possible that I will be fully quenched in the present life. The view of
those ascetics and brahmins who say that there is no such thing as the
total cessation of continued existence is close to greed, yoking,
relishing, attachment, and grasping. The view of those ascetics and
brahmins who say that there is such a thing as the total cessation of
continued existence is close to non-greed, non-yoking, non-relishing,
non-attachment, and non-grasping.' Reflecting like this, they simply
practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future
lives.

Householders, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
    mortifying themselves.
2.  One person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying
    others.[1209](endnotes.xhtml_note-1209){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1209
    .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
3.  One person mortifies themselves and others, committed to the
    practice of mortifying themselves and others.
4.  One person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, committed to
    the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. They live
    without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing
    bliss, with self become divine.

And what person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
mortifying themselves? It's when a person goes naked, ignoring
conventions. ... And so they live committed to practicing these various
ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. This is called a person who
mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying
themselves.

And what person mortifies others, committed to the practice of
mortifying others? It's when a person is a butcher of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a
butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. This is
called a person who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of
mortifying others.

And what person mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves and others? It's when a person is an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new
ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair
and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with
ghee and oil.
...[1210](endnotes.xhtml_note-1210){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1210
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} His bondservants, servants, and workers do
their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful
faces. This is called a person who mortifies themselves and others,
being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others.

And what person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, committed
to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, living without
wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with
self become divine?

It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... A householder hears that teaching, or a
householder's child, or someone reborn in some good family. ... They
give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption ...
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. ...
They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. ... They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they know
they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is called a person who neither mortifies themselves or others,
being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others.
They live without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the
Buddha, "Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[1211](endnotes.xhtml_note-1211){#mn-majjhimapannasa.xhtml_noteref-1211
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Mendicants {#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_mn-bhikkhuvagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn61">

### [MN 61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice to Rāhula at Ambalaṭṭhika ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ambalaṭṭhikarāhulovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1212](endnotes.xhtml_note-1212){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1212
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time Venerable Rāhula was staying at
Ambalaṭṭhikā.[1213](endnotes.xhtml_note-1213){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1213
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came
out of retreat and went to Ambalaṭṭhika to see Venerable Rāhula. Rāhula
saw the Buddha coming off in the distance. He spread out a seat and
placed water for washing the feet. The Buddha sat on the seat spread
out, and washed his feet. Rāhula bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one
side.

Then the Buddha, leaving a little water in the pot, addressed Rāhula,
"Rāhula, do you see this little bit of water left in the pot?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's how little of the ascetic's nature is left in those who are not
ashamed to tell a deliberate lie."

Then the Buddha, tossing away what little water was left in the pot,
said to Rāhula, "Do you see this little bit of water that was tossed
away?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's how the ascetic's nature is tossed away in those who are not
ashamed to tell a deliberate lie."

Then the Buddha, turning the pot upside down, said to Rāhula, "Do you
see how this pot is turned upside down?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's how the ascetic's nature is turned upside down in those who are
not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie."

Then the Buddha, turning the pot right side up, said to Rāhula, "Do you
see how this pot is vacant and hollow?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's how vacant and hollow the ascetic's nature is in those who are
not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie.

Suppose there was a royal bull elephant with tusks like chariot-poles,
able to draw a heavy load, pedigree and battle-hardened. In battle it
uses its fore-feet and hind-feet, its fore-quarters and hind-quarters,
its head, ears, tusks, and tail, but it still protects its
trunk.[1214](endnotes.xhtml_note-1214){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1214
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So its rider thinks: 'This royal bull
elephant still protects its trunk. It has not yet given its life.' But
when that royal bull elephant ... in battle uses its fore-feet and
hind-feet, its fore-quarters and hind-quarters, its head, ears, tusks,
and tail, and its trunk, its rider thinks: 'This royal bull elephant ...
in battle uses its fore-feet and hind-feet, its fore-quarters and
hind-quarters, its head, ears, tusks, and tail, and its trunk. It has
given its life. Now there is nothing that royal bull elephant would not
do.'

In the same way, when someone is not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie,
there is no bad deed they would not do, I say. So you should train like
this: 'I will not tell a lie, even for a
joke.'[1215](endnotes.xhtml_note-1215){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1215
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, Rāhula? What is the purpose of a
mirror?"[1216](endnotes.xhtml_note-1216){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1216
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's for checking your reflection, sir."

"In the same way, deeds of body, speech, and mind should be done only
after repeated
checking.[1217](endnotes.xhtml_note-1217){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1217
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When you want to act with the body, you should check on that same deed:
'Does this act with the body that I want to do lead to hurting myself,
hurting others, or hurting both? Is it unskillful, with suffering as its
outcome and result?' If, while checking in this way, you know: 'This act
with the body that I want to do leads to hurting myself, hurting others,
or hurting both. It's unskillful, with suffering as its outcome and
result.' To the best of your ability, Rāhula, you should not do such a
deed.[1218](endnotes.xhtml_note-1218){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1218
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But if, while checking in this way, you
know: 'This act with the body that I want to do doesn't lead to hurting
myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It's skillful, with happiness
as its outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you should do such a deed.

While you are acting with the body, you should check on that same act:
'Does this act with the body that I am doing lead to hurting myself,
hurting others, or hurting both? Is it unskillful, with suffering as its
outcome and result?' If, while checking in this way, you know: 'This act
with the body that I am doing leads to hurting myself, hurting others,
or hurting both. It's unskillful, with suffering as its outcome and
result.' Then, Rāhula, you should desist from such a deed. But if, while
checking in this way, you know: 'This act with the body that I am doing
doesn't lead to hurting myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It's
skillful, with happiness as its outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you
should continue doing such a deed.

After you have acted with the body, you should check on that same act:
'Does this act with the body that I have done lead to hurting myself,
hurting others, or hurting both? Is it unskillful, with suffering as its
outcome and result?' If, while checking in this way, you know: 'This act
with the body that I have done leads to hurting myself, hurting others,
or hurting both. It's unskillful, with suffering as its outcome and
result.' Then, Rāhula, you should confess, reveal, and clarify such a
deed to the Teacher or a sensible spiritual companion. And having
revealed it you should restrain yourself in future. But if, while
checking in this way, you know: 'This act with the body that I have done
doesn't lead to hurting myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It's
skillful, with happiness as its outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you
should live in rapture and joy because of this, training day and night
in skillful qualities.

When you want to act with speech, you should check on that same
deed:[1219](endnotes.xhtml_note-1219){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1219
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Does this act of speech that I want to do
lead to hurting myself, hurting others, or hurting both? ...' ...

If, while checking in this way, you know: 'This act of speech that I
have done leads to hurting myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It's
unskillful, with suffering as its outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you
should confess, reveal, and clarify such a deed to the Teacher or a
sensible spiritual companion. And having revealed it you should restrain
yourself in future. But if, while checking in this way, you know: 'This
act of speech that I have done doesn't lead to hurting myself, hurting
others, or hurting both. It's skillful, with happiness as its outcome
and result.' Then, Rāhula, you should live in rapture and joy because of
this, training day and night in skillful qualities.

When you want to act with the mind, you should check on that same deed:
'Does this act of mind that I want to do lead to hurting myself, hurting
others, or hurting both? ...' ...

If, while checking in this way, you know: 'This act of mind that I have
done leads to hurting myself, hurting others, or hurting both. It's
unskillful, with suffering as its outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you
should be horrified, repelled, and disgusted by that
deed.[1220](endnotes.xhtml_note-1220){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1220
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And being repelled, you should restrain
yourself in future. But if, while checking in this way, you know: 'This
act with the mind that I have done doesn't lead to hurting myself,
hurting others, or hurting both. It's skillful, with happiness as its
outcome and result.' Then, Rāhula, you should live in rapture and joy
because of this, training day and night in skillful qualities.

All the ascetics and brahmins of the past, future, and present who
purify their physical, verbal, and mental actions do so after repeatedly
checking. So Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: 'I will purify
my physical, verbal, and mental actions after repeatedly checking.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Rāhula approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn62">

### [MN 62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Advice to Rāhula ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahārāhulovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1221](endnotes.xhtml_note-1221){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1221
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms. And Venerable Rāhula also robed up and
followed behind the
Buddha.[1222](endnotes.xhtml_note-1222){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1222
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha looked back at Rāhula and said, "Rāhula, you should
truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal
or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.'"

"Only form, Blessed One? Only form, Holy
One?"[1223](endnotes.xhtml_note-1223){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1223
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Form, Rāhula, as well as feeling and perception and choices and
consciousness."

Then Rāhula thought, "Who would go to the village for alms today after
being advised directly by the Buddha?" Turning back, he sat down
cross-legged at the root of a certain tree, setting his body straight,
and establishing mindfulness in his
presence.[1224](endnotes.xhtml_note-1224){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1224
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Venerable Sāriputta saw him sitting
there,[1225](endnotes.xhtml_note-1225){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1225
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and addressed him, "Rāhula, develop
mindfulness of breathing. When mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial."

Then in the late afternoon, Rāhula came out of retreat, went to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be
very fruitful and
beneficial?"[1226](endnotes.xhtml_note-1226){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1226
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Rāhula, the interior earth element is anything internal, pertaining to
an individual, that's hard, solid, and appropriated. This
includes:[1227](endnotes.xhtml_note-1227){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1227
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin,
flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm,
spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces; or
anything else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's hard, solid,
and appropriated. This is called the interior earth element. The
interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth
element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like this:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly
see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the earth
element, detaching the mind from the earth element.

And what is the water element? The water element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior water element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This includes: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease,
saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine; or anything else internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This is called the interior water element. The interior water element
and the exterior water element are just the water element. This should
be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the water element, detaching
the mind from the water element.

And what is the fire element? The fire element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior fire element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's fire, fiery, and appropriated. This
includes: that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up
when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink; or anything
else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's fire, fiery, and
appropriated. This is called the interior fire element. The interior
fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element.
This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with
right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire element,
detaching the mind from the fire element.

And what is the air element? The air element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior air element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy, and appropriated. This
includes: winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels,
winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths; or
anything else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy,
and appropriated. This is called the interior air element. The interior
air element and the exterior air element are just the air element. This
should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not
mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air element, detaching
the mind from the air element.

And what is the space element? The space element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior space element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's space, spacious, and appropriated.
This includes: the ear canals, nostrils, and mouth; and the space for
swallowing what is eaten and drunk, the space where it stays, and the
space for excreting it from the nether regions; or anything else
internal, pertaining to an individual, that's space, spacious, and
appropriated.[1228](endnotes.xhtml_note-1228){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1228
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the interior space element.
The interior space element and the exterior space element are just the
space element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like
this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you
truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the
space element, detaching the mind from the space element.

Rāhula, meditate like the earth. For when you meditate like the earth,
pleasant and unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind. Suppose they
were to toss both clean and unclean things on the earth, like feces,
urine, spit, pus, and blood. The earth isn't horrified, repelled, and
disgusted because of
this.[1229](endnotes.xhtml_note-1229){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1229
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, meditate like the earth.
For when you meditate like the earth, pleasant and unpleasant contacts
will not occupy your mind.

Meditate like water. For when you meditate like water, pleasant and
unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind. Suppose they were to wash
both clean and unclean things in the water, like feces, urine, spit,
pus, and blood. The water isn't horrified, repelled, and disgusted
because of this. In the same way, meditate like water. For when you
meditate like water, pleasant and unpleasant contacts will not occupy
your mind.

Meditate like fire. For when you meditate like fire, pleasant and
unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind. Suppose a fire were to
burn both clean and unclean things, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and
blood. The fire isn't horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of
this. In the same way, meditate like fire. For when you meditate like
fire, pleasant and unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind.

Meditate like wind. For when you meditate like wind, pleasant and
unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind. Suppose the wind were to
blow on both clean and unclean things, like feces, urine, spit, pus, and
blood. The wind isn't horrified, repelled, and disgusted because of
this. In the same way, meditate like the wind. For when you meditate
like wind, pleasant and unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind.

Meditate like space. For when you meditate like space, pleasant and
unpleasant contacts will not occupy your mind. Just as space is not
established
anywhere,[1230](endnotes.xhtml_note-1230){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1230
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} in the same way, meditate like space. For
when you meditate like space, pleasant and unpleasant contacts will not
occupy your mind.

Meditate on love. For when you meditate on love any ill will will be
given up.

Meditate on compassion. For when you meditate on compassion any cruelty
will be given up.

Meditate on rejoicing. For when you meditate on rejoicing any discontent
will be given up.

Meditate on equanimity. For when you meditate on equanimity any
repulsion will be given up.

Meditate on ugliness. For when you meditate on ugliness any lust will be
given up.

Meditate on impermanence. For when you meditate on impermanence any
conceit 'I am' will be given up.

Develop mindfulness of breathing. When mindfulness of breathing is
developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is
mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful
and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they breath
in. Mindful, they breath
out.[1231](endnotes.xhtml_note-1231){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1231
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When breathing in
lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly
they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out experiencing the whole body.'They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in stilling the physical process.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out stilling the physical process.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing bliss.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing bliss.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing mental processes.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing mental processes.'They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in gladdening the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out gladdening the mind.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing cessation.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out observing cessation.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial. When mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated in this way, even as the final breaths cease they are
known, not unknown."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Rāhula approved what
the Buddha
said.[1232](endnotes.xhtml_note-1232){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1232
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn63">

### [MN 63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Māluṅkyaputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷamālukyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then as Venerable Māluṅkyaputta was in private retreat this thought came
to his
mind:[1233](endnotes.xhtml_note-1233){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1233
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are several convictions that the Buddha has left undeclared; he
has set them aside and refused to comment on them. For example: the
cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and
the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death,
a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists
and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. The
Buddha does not explain these points to me. I don't endorse that, and do
not accept it. I'll go to him and ask him about this. If he gives me a
straight answer on any of these points, I will lead the spiritual life
under him. If he does not explain these points to me, I shall reject the
training and return to a lesser life."

Then in the late afternoon, Māluṅkyaputta came out of retreat and went
to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told the Buddha of
his thoughts. He then continued:

"If the Buddha knows that the cosmos is eternal, please tell me. If you
know that the cosmos is not eternal, tell me. If you don't know whether
the cosmos is eternal or not, then it is straightforward to simply say:
'I neither know nor see.' If you know that the cosmos is finite, or
infinite; that the soul and the body are the same thing, or they are
different things; that after death, a realized one still exists, or no
longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither
still exists nor no longer exists, please tell me. If you don't know any
of these things, then it is straightforward to simply say: 'I neither
know nor see.'"

"What, Māluṅkyaputta, did I ever say to you: 'Come, Māluṅkyaputta, lead
the spiritual life under me, and I will declare these things to you'?"

"No, sir."

"Or did you ever say to me: 'Sir, I will lead the spiritual life under
the Buddha, and the Buddha will declare these things to me'?"

"No, sir."

"So it seems that I did not say to you: 'Come, Māluṅkyaputta, lead the
spiritual life under me, and I will declare these things to you.' And
you never said to me: 'Sir, I will lead the spiritual life under the
Buddha, and the Buddha will declare these things to me.' In that case,
you futile man, who are you and what are you rejecting?

Suppose someone were to say this: 'I will not lead the spiritual life
under the Buddha until the Buddha declares to me that the cosmos is
eternal, or that the cosmos is not eternal ... or that after death a
realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists.' That would
still remain undeclared by the Realized One, and meanwhile that person
would die.

Suppose a man was struck by an arrow thickly smeared with poison. His
friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to treat
him. But the man would say: 'I won't extract this arrow as long as I
don't know whether the man who wounded me was an aristocrat, a brahmin,
a peasant, or a
menial.'[1234](endnotes.xhtml_note-1234){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1234
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He'd say: 'I won't extract this arrow as
long as I don't know the following things about the man who wounded me:
his name and clan; whether he's tall, short, or medium; whether his skin
is black, brown, or tawny; and what village, town, or city he comes
from. I won't extract this arrow as long as I don't know whether the bow
that wounded me was straight or
recurved;[1235](endnotes.xhtml_note-1235){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1235
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether the bow-string is made of
swallow-wort fibre, sunn hemp fibre, sinew, sanseveria fibre, or spurge
fibre;[1236](endnotes.xhtml_note-1236){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1236
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} whether the shaft is made from a bush or a
plantation tree; whether the shaft was fitted with feathers from a
vulture, a heron, a hawk, a peacock, or a stork; whether the shaft was
bound with sinews of a cow, a buffalo, a black lion, or an
ape;[1237](endnotes.xhtml_note-1237){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1237
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and whether the arrowhead was spiked,
razor-tipped, barbed, made of iron or a calf's tooth, or
lancet-shaped.'[1238](endnotes.xhtml_note-1238){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1238
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That man would still not have learned these
things, and meanwhile they'd die.

In the same way, suppose someone was to say: 'I will not lead the
spiritual life under the Buddha until the Buddha declares to me that the
cosmos is eternal, or that the cosmos is not eternal ... or that after
death a realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists.' That
would still remain undeclared by the Realized One, and meanwhile that
person would die.

It's not true that if there were the view 'the cosmos is eternal' there
would be the living of the spiritual
life.[1239](endnotes.xhtml_note-1239){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1239
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's not true that if there were the view
'the cosmos is not eternal' there would be the living of the spiritual
life. When there is the view that the cosmos is eternal or that the
cosmos is not eternal, there is rebirth, there is old age, there is
death, and there is sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
And it is the defeat of these things in this very life that I advocate.
It's not true that if there were the view 'the cosmos is finite' ...
'the cosmos is infinite' ... 'the soul and the body are the same thing'
... 'the soul and the body are different things' ... 'a realized one
still exists after death' ... 'A realized one no longer exists after
death' ... 'a realized one both still exists and no longer exists after
death' ... 'a realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists
after death' there would be the living of the spiritual life. When there
are any of these views there is rebirth, there is old age, there is
death, and there is sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
And it is the defeat of these things in this very life that I advocate.

So, Māluṅkyaputta, you should remember what I have not declared as
undeclared, and what I have declared as declared. And what have I not
declared? I have not declared the following: 'the cosmos is eternal,'
'the cosmos is not eternal,' 'the cosmos is finite,' 'the world is
infinite,' 'the soul and the body are the same thing,' 'the soul and the
body are different things,' 'a realized one still exists after death,'
'A realized one no longer exists after death,' 'a realized one both
still exists and no longer exists after death,' 'a realized one neither
still exists nor no longer exists after death.'

And why haven't I declared these things? Because they aren't beneficial
or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They don't lead
to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening,
and extinguishment. That's why I haven't declared them.

And what have I declared? I have declared the following: 'this is
suffering,' 'this is the origin of suffering,' 'this is the cessation of
suffering,' 'this is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.'

And why have I declared these things? Because they are beneficial and
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. That's why I have declared them. So, Māluṅkyaputta, you
should remember what I have not declared as undeclared, and what I have
declared as declared."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Māluṅkyaputta
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn64">

### [MN 64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Māluṅkya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāmālukyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, do you remember the five lower fetters taught by me?"

When he said this, Venerable Māluṅkyaputta said to him, "Sir, I remember
them."

"But how do you remember them?"

"I remember the lower fetters taught by the Buddha as follows:
substantialist
view,[1240](endnotes.xhtml_note-1240){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1240
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} doubt, misapprehension of precepts and
observances, sensual desire, and ill will. That's how I remember the
five lower fetters taught by the Buddha."

"Who on earth do you remember being taught the five lower fetters in
that
way?[1241](endnotes.xhtml_note-1241){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1241
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Wouldn't the wanderers of other religions
fault you using the simile of the infant? For a little baby doesn't even
have a concept of 'substantial reality', so how could substantialist
view possibly arise in them? Yet the underlying tendency to
substantialist view still lies within them. A little baby doesn't even
have a concept of 'teachings', so how could doubt about the teachings
possibly arise in them? Yet the underlying tendency to doubt still lies
within them. A little baby doesn't even have a concept of 'precepts', so
how could misapprehension of precepts and observances possibly arise in
them? Yet the underlying tendency to misapprehension of precepts and
observances still lies within them. A little baby doesn't even have a
concept of 'sensual pleasures', so how could desire for sensual
pleasures possibly arise in them? Yet the underlying tendency to sensual
desire still lies within them. A little baby doesn't even have a concept
of 'sentient beings', so how could ill will for sentient beings possibly
arise in them? Yet the underlying tendency to ill will still lies within
them. Wouldn't the wanderers of other religions fault you using the
simile of the
infant?"[1242](endnotes.xhtml_note-1242){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1242
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Now is the
time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! May the Buddha teach the
five lower fetters. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble
ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the true persons. Their heart is overcome and mired
in substantialist view, and they don't truly understand the escape from
substantialist view that has arisen. That substantialist view is
entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter.

Their heart is overcome and mired in doubt, and they don't truly
understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. That doubt is
entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter.

Their heart is overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and they don't truly understand the escape from
misapprehension of precepts and observances that has arisen. That
misapprehension of precepts and observances is entrenched in them, not
eliminated: it is a lower fetter.

Their heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, and they don't
truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. That
sensual desire is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower
fetter.

Their heart is overcome and mired in ill will, and they don't truly
understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. That ill will is
entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter.

But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. Their
heart is not overcome and mired in substantialist view, and they truly
understand the escape from substantialist view that has arisen. That
substantialist view, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given
up in them.

Their heart is not overcome and mired in doubt, and they truly
understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. That doubt, along with
any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them.

Their heart is not overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and they truly understand the escape from misapprehension
of precepts and observances that has arisen. That misapprehension of
precepts and observances, along with any underlying tendency to it, is
given up in them.

Their heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire, and they truly
understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. That sensual
desire, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them.

Their heart is not overcome and mired in ill will, and they truly
understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. That ill will,
along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them.

There is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters.
It's not possible to know or see or give up the five lower fetters
without relying on that path and that practice. Suppose there was a
large tree standing with heartwood. It's not possible to cut out the
heartwood without having cut through the bark and the softwood. In the
same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower
fetters. It's not possible to know or see or give up the five lower
fetters without relying on that path and that practice.

But it is possible to know and see and give up the five lower fetters by
relying on that path and that practice.

Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. It is possible
to cut out the heartwood after having cut through the bark and the
softwood. In the same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up
the five lower fetters. It is possible to know and see and give up the
five lower fetters by relying on that path and that practice. Suppose
the river Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it.
Then along comes a feeble person, who thinks: 'By swimming with my arms
I'll safely cross over to the far shore of the Ganges.' But they're not
able to do so. In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught for the
cessation of substantial reality, someone whose mind does not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided should be
regarded as being like that feeble person. Suppose the river Ganges was
full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. Then along comes a
strong person, who thinks: 'By swimming with my arms I'll safely cross
over to the far shore of the Ganges.' And they are able to do so.

In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught for the cessation of
substantial reality, someone whose mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided should be regarded as being like that
strong person.

And what, Ānanda, is the path and the practice for giving up the five
lower fetters? It's when a mendicant---due to the seclusion from
attachments, the giving up of unskillful qualities, and the complete
settling of physical discomforts---quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[1243](endnotes.xhtml_note-1243){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1243
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as
not-self.[1244](endnotes.xhtml_note-1244){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1244
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They turn their mind away from those
things, and apply it to the element free of death: 'This is peaceful;
this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting
go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements.
If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the
five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their
passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and
are not liable to return from that world. This is the path and the
practice for giving up the five lower fetters.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent ... They turn their mind away from those
things ... If they don't attain the ending of defilements, they're
reborn spontaneously ... and are not liable to return from that world.
This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower
fetters.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as
impermanent ... They turn their mind away from those things ... If they
don't attain the ending of defilements, they're reborn spontaneously ...
and are not liable to return from that world. This too is the path and
the practice for giving up the five lower fetters.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as
impermanent ... They turn their mind away from those things ... If they
don't attain the ending of defilements, they're reborn spontaneously ...
and are not liable to return from that world. This too is the path and
the practice for giving up the five lower fetters.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as
impermanent ... They turn their mind away from those things ... If they
don't attain the ending of defilements, they're reborn spontaneously ...
and are not liable to return from that world. This too is the path and
the practice for giving up the five lower
fetters."[1245](endnotes.xhtml_note-1245){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1245
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, if this is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower
fetters, how come some mendicants here are released in heart while
others are released by
wisdom?"[1246](endnotes.xhtml_note-1246){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1246
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In that case, I say it is the diversity of their
faculties."[1247](endnotes.xhtml_note-1247){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1247
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn65">

### [MN 65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bhaddāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaddālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I eat my food in one sitting per
day.[1248](endnotes.xhtml_note-1248){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1248
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Doing so, I find that I'm healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. You too should eat your food in
one sitting per day. Doing so, you'll find that you're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably."

When he said this, Venerable Bhaddāli said to the
Buddha,[1249](endnotes.xhtml_note-1249){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1249
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, I'm not going to try to eat my food
in one sitting per day. For when eating once a day I might feel remorse
and
regret."[1250](endnotes.xhtml_note-1250){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1250
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, Bhaddāli, eat one part of the meal in the place where you're
invited, and bring the rest back to eat. Eating this way, too, you will
sustain
yourself."[1251](endnotes.xhtml_note-1251){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1251
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, I'm not going to try to eat that way, either. For when eating that
way I might also feel remorse and regret." Then, as this rule was being
laid down by the Buddha and the Saṅgha was undertaking it, Bhaddāli
announced he would not try to keep it. Then for the whole of that three
months Bhaddāli would not see the Buddha face to face, as happens when
someone doesn't fulfill the training according to the Teacher's
instructions.[1252](endnotes.xhtml_note-1252){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1252
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Then Bhaddāli went up to those mendicants, and exchanged greetings with
them. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down
to one side. The mendicants said to Bhaddāli, "Reverend Bhaddāli, this
robe is being made for the Buddha. When it's finished and the three
months of the rains residence have passed the Buddha will set out
wandering. Come on, Bhaddāli, learn your lesson. Don't make it hard for
yourself later on."

"Yes, reverends," Bhaddāli replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him, "I have made a mistake, sir. It was
foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me that, as this rule was being laid
down by the Buddha and the Saṅgha was undertaking it, I announced I
would not try to keep it. Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is,
so I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Bhaddāli, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you that, as this rule was being laid down by the Buddha
and the Saṅgha was undertaking it, you announced you would not try to
keep
it.[1253](endnotes.xhtml_note-1253){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1253
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And you didn't realize this situation: 'The Buddha is staying in
Sāvatthī, and he'll know me as the mendicant named Bhaddāli who doesn't
fulfill the training according to the Teacher's instructions.'

And you didn't realize this situation: 'Several monks have commenced the
rains retreat in Sāvatthī ... several nuns have commenced the rains
retreat in Sāvatthī ... several laymen reside in Sāvatthī ... several
laywomen reside in Sāvatthī, and they'll know me as the mendicant named
Bhaddāli who doesn't fulfill the training according to the Teacher's
instructions. ...

Several ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions have
commenced the rains retreat in Sāvatthī, and they'll know me as the
mendicant named Bhaddāli, one of the senior disciples of Gotama, who
doesn't fulfill the training according to the Teacher's instructions.'
You also didn't realize this situation."

"I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me
that, as this rule was being laid down by the Buddha and the Saṅgha was
undertaking it, I announced I would not try to keep it. Please, sir,
accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Bhaddāli, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you that, as this rule was being laid down by the Buddha
and the Saṅgha was undertaking it, you announced you would not try to
keep it.

What do you think, Bhaddāli? Suppose I was to say this to a mendicant
who is freed both
ways:[1254](endnotes.xhtml_note-1254){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1254
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Please, mendicant, be a bridge for me to
cross over the mud.' Would they cross over themselves, or struggle to
get out of it, or just say no?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddāli? Suppose I was to say the same thing to a
mendicant who is freed by wisdom, or a direct witness, or attained to
view, or freed by faith, or a follower of teachings, or a follower by
faith: 'Please, mendicant, be a bridge for me to cross over the mud.'
Would they cross over themselves, or struggle to get out of it, or just
say no?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddāli? At that time were you freed both ways,
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, attained to view, freed by faith, a
follower of teachings, or a follower by faith?"

"No, sir."

"Weren't you vacuous, hollow, and mistaken?"

"Yes, sir.

I made a mistake ... Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I
will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Bhaddāli, you made a mistake. ... But since you have recognized
your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept
it. For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a
mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint
in the future.

Bhaddāli, take a mendicant who doesn't fulfill the training according to
the Teacher's instructions. They think, 'Why don't I frequent a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.
Hopefully I'll realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones.' So they frequent a secluded lodging. While
they're living withdrawn, they're reprimanded by the Teacher, by
sensible spiritual companions after examination, by deities, and by
themselves. Being reprimanded in this way, they don't realize any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
Why is that? Because that's how it is when someone doesn't fulfill the
training according to the Teacher's instructions.

But take a mendicant who does fulfill the training according to the
Teacher's instructions. They think, 'Why don't I frequent a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.
Hopefully I'll realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones.' They frequent a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. While they're
living withdrawn, they're not reprimanded by the Teacher, by sensible
spiritual companions after examination, by deities, or by themselves.
Not being reprimanded in this way, they realize a superhuman distinction
in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. Why is that? Because that's what happens when someone
fulfills the training according to the Teacher's instructions.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. Why is
that? Because that's what happens when someone fulfills the training
according to the Teacher's instructions.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Why is
that? Because that's what happens when someone fulfills the training
according to the Teacher's instructions.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. Why is
that? Because that's what happens when someone fulfills the training
according to the Teacher's instructions.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. ... They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. Why is that? Because that's what happens when
someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher's instructions.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. ...
They're reborn in the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did
good things by way of body, speech, and mind. ... they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman ... they understand how sentient beings are
reborn according to their deeds. Why is that? Because that's what
happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher's
instructions.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' Why is that? Because that's what happens when someone
fulfills the training according to the Teacher's instructions."

When he said this, Venerable Bhaddāli said to the Buddha, "What is the
cause, sir, what is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly
pressuring
him?[1255](endnotes.xhtml_note-1255){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1255
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is the cause, what is the reason
why they don't similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring
him?"

"Take a monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. When
admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue, distracting the discussion
with irrelevant points. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He
doesn't proceed properly, he doesn't fall in line, he doesn't proceed to
get past it, and he doesn't say: 'I'll do what pleases the Saṅgha.' In
such a case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk is a frequent
offender, with many offenses. When admonished by the monks, he dodges
the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He
displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn't proceed properly,
he doesn't fall in line, he doesn't proceed to get past it, and he
doesn't say: "I'll do what pleases the Saṅgha." It'd be good for the
venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary
issue is not quickly settled.' And that's what they do.

Take some other monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. When
admonished by the monks, he doesn't dodge the issue, distracting the
discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn't display annoyance, hate,
and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line, he proceeds to
get past it, and he says: 'I'll do what pleases the Saṅgha.' In such a
case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk is a frequent offender, with
many offenses. When admonished by the monks, he doesn't dodge the issue,
distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn't display
annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line,
he proceeds to get past it, and he says: "I'll do what pleases the
Saṅgha." It'd be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a
way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.' And that's what
they do.

Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many
offenses. When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue ... In such
a case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk is an occasional offender
without many offenses. When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue
... It'd be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way
that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled.' And that's what
they do.

Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many
offenses. When admonished by the monks, he doesn't dodge the issue ...
In such a case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk is an occasional
offender without many offenses. When admonished by the monks, he doesn't
dodge the issue ... It'd be good for the venerables to examine this monk
in such a way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.' And
that's what they do.

Take some other monk who gets by with mere faith and love. In such a
case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and
love. Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring
him---[1256](endnotes.xhtml_note-1256){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1256
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} no, let him not lose what little faith and
love he has!'

Suppose there was a person with one eye. Their friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin would protect that one eye: 'Let them not lose the one
eye that they have!' In the same way, some monk gets by with mere faith
and love. In such a case, the monks say: 'Reverends, this monk gets by
with mere faith and love. Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring
him---no, let him not lose what little faith and love he has!' This is
the cause, this is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly
pressuring him. And this is the cause, this is the reason why they don't
similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring him."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why there used to be fewer
training rules but more enlightened
mendicants?[1257](endnotes.xhtml_note-1257){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1257
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what is the cause, what is the reason
why these days there are more training rules and fewer enlightened
mendicants?"

"That's how it is, Bhaddāli. When sentient beings are in decline and the
true teaching is disappearing there are more training rules and fewer
enlightened mendicants. The Teacher does not lay down training rules for
disciples as long as certain defiling influences have not appeared in
the
Saṅgha.[1258](endnotes.xhtml_note-1258){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1258
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when such defiling influences appear in
the Saṅgha, the Teacher lays down training rules for disciples to
protect against them.

And they don't appear until the Saṅgha has attained a great size, an
abundance of material support and fame, learning, and seniority. But
when the Saṅgha has attained these things, then such defiling influences
appear in the Saṅgha, and the Teacher lays down training rules for
disciples to protect against them.

There were only a few of you there at the time when I taught the
exposition on the simile of the thoroughbred
colt.[1259](endnotes.xhtml_note-1259){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1259
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do you remember that, Bhaddāli?"

"No, sir."

"What do you believe the reason for that is?"

"Sir, it's surely because for a long time now I haven't fulfilled the
training according to the Teacher's instructions."

"That's not the only reason, Bhaddāli. Rather, for a long time I have
comprehended your mind and known: 'While I'm teaching, this futile man
doesn't pay attention, apply the mind, concentrate wholeheartedly, or
actively listen.' Still, Bhaddāli, I shall teach the exposition on the
simile of the thoroughbred colt. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," Bhaddāli replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose a deft horse trainer were to obtain a fine thoroughbred. First
of all he'd make it get used to wearing the bit. Because it has not done
this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. But
with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is
extinguished.[1260](endnotes.xhtml_note-1260){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1260
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to
wearing the harness. Because it has not done this before, it still
resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. But with regular and gradual
practice its bad behavior is extinguished.

When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to
walking in procession, circling, prancing, galloping, charging, the
protocols and traditions of court, and in the very best speed,
fleetness, and
friendliness.[1261](endnotes.xhtml_note-1261){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1261
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because it has not done this before, it
still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. But with regular and
gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished.

When it has done this, the horse trainer next rewards it with a grooming
and a rub down. A fine royal thoroughbred with these ten factors is
worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of
kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with ten qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What ten? It's when a mendicant has an
adept's right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. A mendicant with these ten qualities is
worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is
the supreme field of merit for the world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Bhaddāli approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn66">

### [MN 66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Quail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Laṭukikopamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Aṅguttarāpans, near the town of theirs named Āpaṇa.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Āpaṇa for alms. He wandered for alms in Āpaṇa. After the meal,
on his return from almsround, he went to a certain forest grove for the
day's meditation. Having plunged deep into it, he sat at the root of a
certain tree to meditate.

Venerable Udāyī also robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Āpaṇa for alms. He wandered for alms in Āpaṇa. After the
meal, on his return from almsround, he went to that forest grove for the
day's meditation. Having plunged deep into it, he sat at the root of a
certain tree to meditate. Then as Venerable Udāyī was in private retreat
this thought came to his mind:

"The Buddha has rid us of so many things that bring suffering and gifted
us so many things that bring happiness! He has rid us of so many
unskillful things and gifted us so many skillful things!"

Then in the late afternoon, Udāyī came out of retreat and went to the
Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind:
'The Buddha has rid us of so many things that bring suffering and gifted
us so many things that bring happiness! He has rid us of so many
unskillful things and gifted us so many skillful things!'

For we used to eat in the evening, the morning, and at the wrong time of
day.[1262](endnotes.xhtml_note-1262){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1262
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But then there came a time when the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, saying, 'Please, mendicants, give up that meal
at the wrong time of day.' At that, sir, we became sad and upset, 'But
these faithful householders give us delicious fresh and cooked foods at
the wrong time of day. And the Blessed One tells us to give it up! The
Holy One tells us to let it go!' But when we considered our love and
respect for the Buddha, and our sense of conscience and prudence, we
gave up that meal at the wrong time of day. Then we ate in the evening
and the morning.

But then there came a time when the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
saying, 'Please, mendicants, give up that meal at the wrong time of
night.'[1263](endnotes.xhtml_note-1263){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1263
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} At that, sir, we became sad and upset, 'But
that's considered the more delicious of the two meals. And the Blessed
One tells us to give it up! The Holy One tells us to let it go!' Once it
so happened that a certain person got some soup during the day. He said,
'Come, let's set this aside; we'll enjoy it together this evening.'
Nearly all meals are prepared at night, only a few in the day. But when
we considered our love and respect for the Buddha, and our sense of
conscience and prudence, we gave up that meal at the wrong time of
night.

In the past, mendicants went wandering for alms in the dark of the
night. They walked into a swamp, or fell into a sewer, or collided with
a thorn bush, or collided with a sleeping cow, or encountered youths
escaping a crime or on their way to commit one, or were invited by a
female to commit a lewd
act.[1264](endnotes.xhtml_note-1264){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1264
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Once it so happened that I was wandering for alms in the dark of the
night. A woman washing a pot saw me by a flash of lightning. Startled,
she cried out, 'Woe is me! It's a damn
goblin!'[1265](endnotes.xhtml_note-1265){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1265
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When she said this, I said to her, 'Sister, I am no goblin. I'm a
mendicant waiting for alms.'

'Die, mendicant's father! Die, mendicant's
mother\![1266](endnotes.xhtml_note-1266){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1266
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Better to have your belly sliced open with
a sharp meat cleaver than to wander for alms in the dark of night for
the sake of your belly!'

Recollecting that, I thought, 'The Buddha has rid us of so many things
that bring suffering and gifted us so many things that bring happiness!
He has rid us of so many unskillful things and gifted us so many
skillful things!'"

"This is exactly what happens when some silly people are told by me to
give something up. They
say,[1267](endnotes.xhtml_note-1267){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1267
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'What, such a trivial, insignificant thing
as this? This ascetic is much too strict!' They don't give it up, and
they nurse bitterness towards me; and for the mendicants who want to
train, that becomes a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie that has not
rotted, and a heavy
yoke.[1268](endnotes.xhtml_note-1268){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1268
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a quail was tied with a vine, and was waiting there to be
injured, caged, or killed. Would it be right to say that, for that
quail, that vine is weak, feeble, rotten, and insubstantial?"

"No, sir. For that quail, that vine is a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie
that has not rotted, and a heavy yoke."

"In the same way, when some silly people are told by me to give
something up, they say, 'What, such a trivial, insignificant thing as
this? This ascetic is much too strict!' They don't give it up, and they
nurse bitterness towards me; and for the mendicants who want to train,
that becomes a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie that has not rotted, and
a heavy yoke.

But when some gentlemen are told by me to give something up, they say,
'What, we just have to give up such a trivial, insignificant thing as
this, when the Blessed One tells us to give it up, the Holy One tells us
to let it go?' They give it up, and they don't nurse bitterness towards
me; and when the mendicants who want to train have given that up, they
live relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a
wild deer. For them, that bond is weak, feeble, rotten, and
insubstantial.

Suppose there was a royal bull elephant with tusks like chariot-poles,
able to draw a heavy load, pedigree and battle-hardened. And it was
bound with a strong harness. But just by twisting its body a little, it
would break apart its bonds and go wherever it wants. Would it be right
to say that, for that bull elephant, that strong harness is a strong,
firm, stout bond, a tie that has not rotted, and a heavy yoke?"

"No, sir. For that bull elephant, that strong harness is weak, feeble,
rotten, and insubstantial."

"In the same way, when some gentlemen are told by me to give something
up, they say, 'What, we just have to give up such a trivial,
insignificant thing as this, when the Blessed One tells us to give it
up, the Holy One tells us to let it go?' They give it up, and they don't
nurse bitterness towards me; and when the mendicants who want to train
have given that up, they live relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity,
their hearts free as a wild deer. For them, that bond is weak, feeble,
rotten, and insubstantial.

Suppose there was a poor man, with few possessions and little wealth. He
had a single broken-down hovel open to the crows, not the best sort; a
single broken-down couch, not the best sort; a single pot for storing
grain, not the best sort; and a single wifey, not the best sort. He'd
see a mendicant sitting in meditation in the cool shade, their hands and
feet well washed after eating a delectable
meal.[1269](endnotes.xhtml_note-1269){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1269
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He'd think, 'The ascetic life is so very
pleasant! The ascetic life is so very skillful! If only I could shave
off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.' But he's not able to give up his broken-down
hovel, his broken-down couch, his pot for storing grain, or his
wifey---none of which are the best sort---in order to go forth. Would it
be right to say that, for that man, those bonds are weak, feeble,
rotten, and insubstantial?"

"No, sir. For that man, they are a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie that
has not rotted, and a heavy yoke."

"In the same way, when some silly people are told by me to give
something up, they say, 'What, such a trivial, insignificant thing as
this? This ascetic is much too strict!' They don't give it up, and they
nurse bitterness towards me; and for the mendicants who want to train,
that becomes a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie that has not rotted, and
a heavy yoke.

Suppose there was a rich householder or householder's child, affluent,
and wealthy. He had a vast amount of gold ingots, grain, fields, lands,
wives, and male and female
bondservants.[1270](endnotes.xhtml_note-1270){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1270
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He'd see a mendicant sitting in meditation
in the cool shade, their hands and feet well washed after eating a
delectable meal. He'd think, 'The ascetic life is so very pleasant! The
ascetic life is so very skillful! If only I could shave off my hair and
beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.' And he is able to give up his vast amount of gold ingots,
grain, fields, lands, wives, and male and female bondservants in order
to go forth. Would it be right to say that, for that householder, they
are a strong, firm, stout bond, a tie that has not rotted, and a heavy
yoke?"

"No, sir. For that householder, those bonds are weak, feeble, rotten,
and insubstantial."

"In the same way, when some gentlemen are told by me to give something
up, they say, 'What, we just have to give up such a trivial,
insignificant thing as this, when the Blessed One tells us to give it
up, the Holy One tells us to let it go?' They give it up, and they don't
nurse bitterness towards me; and when the mendicants who want to train
have given that up, they live relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity,
their hearts free as a wild deer. For them, that bond is weak, feeble,
rotten, and insubstantial.

Udāyī, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a certain person practicing to give up and let go of attachments.
As they do so, memories and thoughts connected with attachments beset
them. They tolerate them and don't give them up, get rid of them,
eliminate them, and obliterate them. I call this person 'fettered', not
'detached'. Why is that? Because I understand the diversity of faculties
as it applies to this
person.[1271](endnotes.xhtml_note-1271){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1271
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take another person practicing to give up and let go of attachments. As
they do so, memories and thoughts connected with attachments beset them.
They don't tolerate them, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate
them, and obliterate them. I call this person 'fettered', not
'detached'. Why is that? Because I understand the diversity of faculties
as it applies to this person.

Take another person practicing to give up and let go of attachments. As
they do so, every so often they lose mindfulness, and memories and
thoughts connected with attachments beset them. Their mindfulness is
slow to come up, but they quickly give up, get rid of, eliminate, and
obliterate those thoughts. Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had
been heated all day, and a person let two or three drops of water fall
onto it. The drops would be slow to fall, but they'd quickly dry up and
evaporate.

In the same way, take a person practicing to give up and let go of
attachments. As they do so, every so often they lose mindfulness, and
memories and thoughts connected with attachments beset them. Their
mindfulness is slow to come up, but they quickly give them up, get rid
of, eliminate, and obliterate those thoughts. I also call this person
'fettered', not 'detached'. Why is that? Because I understand the
diversity of faculties as it applies to this person.

Take another person who, understanding that attachment is the root of
suffering, is freed with the ending of attachments. I call this person
'detached', not 'fettered'. Why is that? Because I understand the
diversity of faculties as it applies to this person. These are the four
people found in the world.

Udāyī, these are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five?
Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual
stimulation is called sensual pleasure---a filthy, ordinary, ignoble
pleasure. Such pleasure should not be cultivated or developed, but
should be feared, I say.

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

This is called the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion,
the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening. Such pleasure should
be cultivated and developed, and should not be feared, I say.

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
This belongs to the perturbable, I say. And what there belongs to the
perturbable? Whatever placing of the mind and keeping it connected has
not ceased there is what belongs to the perturbable.

Take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption. This
belongs to the perturbable, I say. And what there belongs to the
perturbable? Whatever rapture and bliss has not ceased there is what
belongs to the perturbable.

Take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture, enters and
remains in the third absorption. This belongs to the perturbable. And
what there belongs to the perturbable? Whatever bliss with equanimity
has not ceased there is what belongs to the perturbable.

Take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain, enters and remains in
the fourth absorption. This belongs to the imperturbable, I say.

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
But this is not enough, I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes
beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption. That
goes beyond it. But this too is not enough, I say: give it up, go beyond
it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture, enters and
remains in the third absorption. That goes beyond it. But this too is
not enough, I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain, enters and remains in
the fourth absorption. That goes beyond it. But this too is not enough,
I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the
ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. That goes beyond it. But this too is not
enough, I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. That goes beyond it. But this too
is not enough, I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. That goes beyond it. But this too is
not enough, I say: give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness,
enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. That goes beyond it. But this too is not enough, I say:
give it up, go beyond it. And what goes beyond it?

Take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of
perception and feeling. That goes beyond it.

So, Udāyī, I even recommend giving up the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. Do you see any fetter, large or small,
that I don't recommend giving up?"

"No, sir."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Udāyī approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn67">

### [MN 67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Cātumā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cātumasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near Cātumā
in a myrobalan
grove.[1272](endnotes.xhtml_note-1272){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1272
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time five hundred mendicants headed by Sāriputta and
Moggallāna arrived at Cātumā to see the Buddha. And the visiting
mendicants, while exchanging pleasantries with the resident mendicants,
preparing their lodgings, and putting away their bowls and robes, made a
dreadful racket.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, who's making that
dreadful racket? You'd think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

And Ānanda told him what had happened.

"Well then, Ānanda, in my name tell those mendicants that the teacher
summons them."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. He went to those mendicants and said,
"Venerables, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their
seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to them:

"Mendicants, what's with that dreadful racket? You'd think it was
fishermen hauling in a catch!"

And they told him what had happened.

"Go away, mendicants, I dismiss you. You are not to stay in my
presence."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. They got up from their seats,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right.
They set their lodgings in order and left, taking their bowls and robes.

Now at that time the Sakyans of Cātumā were sitting together at the town
hall on some business. Seeing those mendicants coming off in the
distance, they went up to them and said, "Hello venerables, where are
you going?"

"Sirs, the mendicant Saṅgha has been dismissed by the Buddha."

"Well then, venerables, sit here for an hour. Hopefully we'll be able to
restore the Buddha's confidence."

"Yes, sirs," replied the mendicants.

Then the Sakyans of Cātumā went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha
welcome the mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha support the mendicant
Saṅgha now as he did in the past! There are mendicants here who are
junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training.
If they don't get to see the Buddha they may change and fall apart. If
young seedlings don't get water they may change and fall apart. In the
same way, there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth,
newly come to this teaching and training. If they don't get to see the
Buddha they may change and fall apart. If a young calf doesn't see its
mother it may change and fall apart. In the same way, there are
mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this
teaching and training. If they don't get to see the Buddha they may
change and fall apart. May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant
Saṅgha! May the Buddha welcome the mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha
support the mendicant Saṅgha now as he did in the past!"

Then Brahmā Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily as a
strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the
Brahmā realm and reappeared in front of the Buddha. He arranged his robe
over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

"May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha
welcome the mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha support the mendicant
Saṅgha now as he did in the past! There are mendicants here who are
junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training.
If they don't get to see the Buddha they may change and fall apart. If
young seedlings don't get water they may change and fall apart. ... If a
young calf doesn't see its mother it may change and fall apart. In the
same way, there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth,
newly come to this teaching and training. If they don't get to see the
Buddha they may change and fall apart. May the Buddha be happy with the
mendicant Saṅgha! May the Buddha welcome the mendicant Saṅgha! May the
Buddha support the mendicant Saṅgha now as he did in the past!"

The Sakyans of Cātumā and Brahmā Sahampati were able to restore the
Buddha's confidence with the similes of the seedlings and the calf.

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants, "Get up,
reverends, and pick up your bowls and robes. The Buddha's confidence has
been restored by the Sakyans of Cātumā and Brahmā Sahampati with the
similes of the seedlings and the calf."

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their
seats and, taking their bowls and robes, went to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta,
"Sāriputta, what did you think when the mendicant Saṅgha was dismissed
by me?"

"Sir, I thought this: 'The Buddha has dismissed the mendicant Saṅgha.
Now he will remain passive, dwelling in blissful meditation in the
present life, and so will we.'"

"Hold on, Sāriputta, hold on! Don't you ever think such a thing
again!"[1273](endnotes.xhtml_note-1273){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1273
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, "Moggallāna, what
did you think when the mendicant Saṅgha was dismissed by me?"

"Sir, I thought this: 'The Buddha has dismissed the mendicant Saṅgha.
Now he will remain passive, dwelling in blissful meditation in the
present life. Meanwhile, Venerable Sāriputta and I shall lead the
mendicant Saṅgha.'"

"Good, good, Moggallāna! For either I should lead the mendicant Saṅgha,
or else Sāriputta and Moggallāna."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, when you go into the water you should anticipate four
dangers.[1274](endnotes.xhtml_note-1274){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1274
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? The dangers of waves, gharials,
whirlpools, and sharks. These are the four dangers that you should
anticipate when you go into the water.

In the same way, a person gone forth from the lay life to homelessness
in this teaching and training should anticipate four dangers. What four?
The dangers of waves, gharials, whirlpools, and sharks.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of
waves?[1275](endnotes.xhtml_note-1275){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1275
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a gentleman has gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth,
their spiritual companions advise and instruct them: 'You should go out
like this, and come back like that. You should look to the front like
this, and to the side like that. You should contract your limbs like
this, and extend them like that. This is how you should bear your outer
robe, bowl, and
robes.'[1276](endnotes.xhtml_note-1276){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1276
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we
advised and instructed
others.[1277](endnotes.xhtml_note-1277){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1277
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And now these mendicants---who you'd think
were our children or grandchildren---imagine they can advise and
instruct us!' They resign the training and return to a lesser life. This
is called a mendicant who resigns the training and returns to a lesser
life for fear of the danger of waves. 'Danger of waves' is a term for
anger and distress.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of
gharials?[1278](endnotes.xhtml_note-1278){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1278
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a gentleman has gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth,
their spiritual companions advise and instruct them: 'You may eat,
consume, taste, and drink these things, but not those. You may eat
what's allowable, but not what's unallowable. You may eat at the right
time, but not at the wrong time.' They think: 'Formerly, as laypeople,
we used to eat, consume, taste, and drink what we wanted, not what we
didn't want. We ate and drank both allowable and unallowable things, at
the right time and the wrong time. And these faithful householders give
us delicious fresh and cooked foods at the wrong time of day. But these
guys imagine they can gag our mouths!' They resign the training and
return to a lesser life. This is called one who rejects the training and
returns to a lesser life because they're afraid of the danger of
gharials. 'Danger of gharials' is a term for gluttony.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of
whirlpools?[1279](endnotes.xhtml_note-1279){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1279
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a gentleman has gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth,
they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter a
village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind,
without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense
faculties. There they see a householder or their child amusing
themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. They think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we amused ourselves,
supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. And
it's true that my family is
wealthy.[1280](endnotes.xhtml_note-1280){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1280
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I can both enjoy my wealth and make merit.'
They resign the training and return to a lesser life. This is called one
who rejects the training and returns to a lesser life for fear of the
danger of whirlpools. 'Danger of whirlpools' is a term for the five
kinds of sensual stimulation.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of
sharks?[1281](endnotes.xhtml_note-1281){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1281
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a gentleman has gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' When they've gone forth,
they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl and robe, enter a
village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind,
without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense
faculties. There they see a female scantily clad, with revealing
clothes. Lust infects their mind, so they resign the training and return
to a lesser life. This is called one who rejects the training and
returns to a lesser life for fear of the danger of sharks. 'Danger of
sharks' is a term for females.

These are the four dangers that a person who gone forth from the lay
life to homelessness in this teaching and training should anticipate."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn68">

### [MN 68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Naḷakapāna ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Naḷakapānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Kosalans near Naḷakapāna in the grove of flame-of-the-forest
trees.[1282](endnotes.xhtml_note-1282){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1282
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time several very well-known gentlemen had gone forth out of
faith from the lay life to homelessness in the Buddha's
name---[1283](endnotes.xhtml_note-1283){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1283
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The venerables Anuruddha, Bhaddiya,
Kimbila, Bhagu, Koṇḍañña, Revata, Ānanda, and other very well-known
gentlemen.[1284](endnotes.xhtml_note-1284){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1284
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the Buddha was sitting in the open, surrounded by the
mendicant Saṅgha. Then the Buddha spoke to the mendicants about those
gentlemen: "Mendicants, those gentlemen who have gone forth out of faith
from the lay life to homelessness in my name---I trust they're satisfied
with the spiritual life?" When this was said, the mendicants kept
silent.

For a second and a third time the Buddha asked the same question. For a
third time, the mendicants kept silent.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "Why don't I question just those
gentlemen?"[1285](endnotes.xhtml_note-1285){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1285
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha said to Venerable
Anuruddha, "Anuruddha and friends, I hope you're satisfied with the
spiritual life?"

"Indeed, sir, we are satisfied with the spiritual life."

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! It's appropriate for gentlemen like
yourselves, who have gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness, to be satisfied with the spiritual life. Since you're
blessed with youth, in the prime of life, with pristine black hair, you
could have enjoyed sensual pleasures; yet you have gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness. But you didn't go forth to escape a summons by
a king or a summons for a bandit, or because you were in debt or in
fear, or in order to make a
living.[1286](endnotes.xhtml_note-1286){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1286
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, didn't you go forth thinking: 'I'm
swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering.
Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of suffering'?"

"Yes, sir."

"But, Anuruddha and friends, when a gentleman has gone forth like this,
what should he do? Take someone who doesn't achieve the rapture and
bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities,
or something even more peaceful than that. Their mind is still occupied
by desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse,
doubt, discontent, and
sloth.[1287](endnotes.xhtml_note-1287){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1287
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's someone who doesn't achieve the
rapture and bliss that are secluded from sensual pleasures and
unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that.

Take someone who does achieve the rapture and bliss that are secluded
from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more
peaceful than that. Their mind is not occupied by desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, doubt, discontent,
and sloth. That's someone who does achieve the rapture and bliss that
are secluded from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or
something even more peaceful than that.

Is this what you think of me? 'The Realized One has not given up the
defilements that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful,
resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. That's
why, after appraisal, he uses some things, endures some things, avoids
some things, and dispels some
things.'"[1288](endnotes.xhtml_note-1288){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1288
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No sir, we don't think of you that way. We think of you this way: 'The
Realized One has given up the defilements that are corrupting, leading
to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old
age, and death. That's why, after appraisal, he uses some things,
endures some things, avoids some things, and dispels some things.'"

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! The Realized One has given up the
defilements that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful,
resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. He has
cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them
so they are unable to arise in the future. Just as a palm tree with its
crown cut off is incapable of further growth, in the same way, the
Realized One has given up the defilements so they are unable to arise in
the future. That's why, after appraisal, he uses some things, endures
some things, avoids some things, and dispels some things.

What do you think, Anuruddha and friends? What advantage does the
Realized One see in declaring the rebirth of his disciples who have
passed away: 'This one is reborn here, while that one is reborn
there'?"[1289](endnotes.xhtml_note-1289){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1289
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"The Realized One does not declare such things for the sake of deceiving
people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or
popularity, nor thinking, 'So let people know about me!' Rather, there
are gentlemen of faith who are full of sublime joy and gladness. When
they hear that, they apply their minds to that end. That is for their
lasting welfare and happiness.

Take a monk who hears this: 'The monk named so-and-so has passed away.
The Buddha has declared that, he was enlightened.' And he's either seen
for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable had such
ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom.
Recollecting that monk's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. That's how a monk lives at
ease.

Take a monk who hears this: 'The monk named so-and-so has passed away.
The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of the five lower fetters,
he's been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not
liable to return from that world.' And he's either seen for himself, or
heard from someone else, that that venerable had such ethics, such
qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting
that monk's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies
his mind to that end. That too is how a monk lives at ease.

Take a monk who hears this: 'The monk named so-and-so has passed away.
The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, he's a once-returner. He'll come
back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.' And he's
either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable
had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such
freedom. Recollecting that monk's faith, ethics, learning, generosity,
and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. That too is how a monk
lives at ease.

Take a monk who hears this: 'The monk named so-and-so has passed away.
The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters he's a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.' And he's either seen for himself, or heard from someone
else, that that venerable had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom,
such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting that monk's faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that
end. That too is how a monk lives at ease.

Take a nun who hears this: 'The nun named so-and-so has passed away. The
Buddha has declared that, she was enlightened.' And she's either seen
for herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister had such
ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom.
Recollecting that nun's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom,
she applies her mind to that end. That's how a nun lives at ease.

Take a nun who hears this: 'The nun named so-and-so has passed away. The
Buddha has declared that, with the ending of the five lower fetters,
she's been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not
liable to return from that world.' And she's either seen for herself, or
heard from someone else, that that sister had such ethics, such
qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting
that nun's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies
her mind to that end. That too is how a nun lives at ease.

Take a nun who hears this: 'The nun named so-and-so has passed away. The
Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, she's a once-returner. She'll
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.' And
she's either seen for herself, or heard from someone else, that that
sister had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or
such freedom. Recollecting that nun's faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. That too is
how a nun lives at ease.

Take a nun who hears this: 'The nun named so-and-so has passed away. The
Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters she's a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.' And she's either seen for herself, or heard from someone
else, that that sister had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom,
such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting that nun's faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. That
too is how a nun lives at ease.

Take a layman who hears this: 'The layman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, he's been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished
there, not liable to return from that world.' And he's either seen for
himself, or heard from someone else, that that venerable had such
ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom.
Recollecting that layman's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. That's how a layman lives at
ease.

Take a layman who hears this: 'The layman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters,
and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, he's a once-returner.
He'll come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.'
And he's either seen for himself, or heard from someone else, that that
venerable had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation,
or such freedom. Recollecting that layman's faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that end. That too is how
a layman lives at ease.

Take a layman who hears this: 'The layman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters
he's a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound
for awakening.' And he's either seen for himself, or heard from someone
else, that that venerable had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom,
such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting that layman's faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he applies his mind to that
end. That too is how a layman lives at ease.

Take a laywoman who hears this: 'The laywoman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, she's been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished
there, not liable to return from that world.' And she's either seen for
herself, or heard from someone else, that that sister had such ethics,
such qualities, such wisdom, such meditation, or such freedom.
Recollecting that laywoman's faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom, she applies her mind to that end. That's how a laywoman lives at
ease.

Take a laywoman who hears this: 'The laywoman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters,
and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, she's a once-returner.
She'll come back to this world once only, then make an end of
suffering.' And she's either seen for herself, or heard from someone
else, that that sister had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom,
such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting that laywoman's faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that
end. That too is how a laywoman lives at ease.

Take a laywoman who hears this: 'The laywoman named so-and-so has passed
away. The Buddha has declared that, with the ending of three fetters
she's a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound
for awakening.' And she's either seen for herself, or heard from someone
else, that that sister had such ethics, such qualities, such wisdom,
such meditation, or such freedom. Recollecting that laywoman's faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that
end. That too is how a laywoman lives at ease.

So it's not for the sake of deceiving people or flattering them, nor for
the benefit of possessions, honor, or popularity, nor thinking, 'So let
people know about me!' that the Realized One declares the rebirth of his
disciples who have passed away: 'This one is reborn here, while that one
is reborn there.' Rather, there are gentlemen of faith who are full of
joy and gladness. When they hear that, they apply their minds to that
end. That is for their lasting welfare and happiness."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Anuruddha approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn69">

### [MN 69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Gulissāni ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Goliyānisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time a wilderness mendicant of village behavior named
Gulissāni had come down to the midst of the Saṅgha on some
business.[1290](endnotes.xhtml_note-1290){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1290
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There Venerable Sāriputta spoke to the
mendicants about Gulissāni:

"Reverends, a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should
have respect and reverence for his spiritual companions. If he doesn't,
there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he has
no respect and reverence for his spiritual
companions?'[1291](endnotes.xhtml_note-1291){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1291
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why a wilderness monk who has come
to stay in the Saṅgha should have respect and reverence for his
spiritual companions.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful
where he sits,
thinking:[1292](endnotes.xhtml_note-1292){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1292
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I shall sit so that I don't intrude on the
senior monks and I don't block the junior monks from a seat.' If he
doesn't, there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he's
not careful where he
sits?'[1293](endnotes.xhtml_note-1293){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1293
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why a wilderness monk who has come
to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful where he sits.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should know even
the supplementary
regulations.[1294](endnotes.xhtml_note-1294){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1294
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he doesn't, there'll be some who say:
'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn't even know the
supplementary regulations?' That's why a wilderness monk who has come to
stay in the Saṅgha should know even the supplementary regulations.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't enter the
village too early or return too late in the
day.[1295](endnotes.xhtml_note-1295){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1295
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he does so, there'll be some who say:
'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he enters the village too early or
returns too late in the day?' That's why a wilderness monk who has come
to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't enter the village too early or return
too late in the day.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't visit
families before or after the
meal.[1296](endnotes.xhtml_note-1296){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1296
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he does so, there'll be some who say:
'This wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the
wilderness, must be used to wandering about at the wrong time, since he
behaves like this when he's come to the Saṅgha.' That's why a wilderness
monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't visit families before
or after the meal.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't be
restless and fickle. If he is, there'll be some who say: 'This
wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness,
must be used to being restless and fickle, since he behaves like this
when he's come to the Saṅgha.' That's why a wilderness monk who has come
to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't be restless and fickle.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn't be
scurrilous and loose-tongued. If he is, there'll be some who say:
'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he's scurrilous and loose-tongued?'
That's why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha
shouldn't be scurrilous and loose-tongued.

A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to
admonish, with good friends. If he's hard to admonish, with bad friends,
there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he's
hard to admonish, with bad friends?' That's why a wilderness monk who
has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to admonish, with good
friends.

A wilderness monk should guard the sense doors. If he doesn't, there'll
be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's
staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn't guard
the sense doors?' That's why a wilderness monk should guard the sense
doors.

A wilderness monk should eat in moderation. If he doesn't, there'll be
some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying
alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he eats too much?' That's
why a wilderness monk should eat in moderation.

A wilderness monk should be committed to wakefulness. If he isn't,
there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he's
not committed to wakefulness?' That's why a wilderness monk should be
committed to wakefulness.

A wilderness monk should be energetic. If he isn't, there'll be some who
say: 'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he's not energetic?' That's why a
wilderness monk should be energetic.

A wilderness monk should be mindful. If he isn't, there'll be some who
say: 'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he's not mindful?' That's why a
wilderness monk should be mindful.

A wilderness monk should have immersion. If he doesn't, there'll be some
who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone
and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn't have immersion?'
That's why a wilderness monk should have immersion.

A wilderness monk should be wise. If he isn't, there'll be some who say:
'What's the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and
autonomous in the wilderness, since he's not wise?' That's why a
wilderness monk should be wise.

A wilderness monk should make an effort in regards to the teaching and
training.[1297](endnotes.xhtml_note-1297){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1297
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are those who will question a
wilderness monk about the teaching and training. If he is stumped,
there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he is
stumped by a question about the teaching and training?' That's why a
wilderness monk should make an effort to learn the teaching and
training.

A wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the peaceful
liberations that are formless, transcending form. There are those who
will question a wilderness monk about the formless liberations. If he is
stumped, there'll be some who say: 'What's the point of this wilderness
venerable's staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he is
stumped by a question about the formless liberations?' That's why a
wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the peaceful
liberations that are formless, transcending form.

A wilderness monk should practice meditation to realize the superhuman
state. There are those who will question a wilderness monk about the
superhuman state. If he is stumped, there'll be some who say: 'What's
the point of this wilderness venerable's staying alone and autonomous in
the wilderness, since he doesn't know the goal for which he went
forth?'[1298](endnotes.xhtml_note-1298){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1298
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why a wilderness monk should
practice meditation to realize the superhuman state."

When Venerable Sāriputta said this, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to
him, "Reverend Sāriputta, should these things be undertaken and followed
only by wilderness monks, or by those who live within a village as
well?"

"Reverend Moggallāna, these things should be undertaken and followed by
wilderness monks, and still more by those who live within a
village."[1299](endnotes.xhtml_note-1299){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1299
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn70">

### [MN 70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kīṭāgiri ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kīṭāgirisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kāsis together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I abstain from eating at
night.[1300](endnotes.xhtml_note-1300){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1300
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Doing so, I find that I'm healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. You too should abstain from
eating at night. Doing so, you'll find that you're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably."

"Yes, sir," they replied.

Then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the land of the Kāsis,
arrived at a town of the Kāsis named Kīṭāgiri, and stayed there.

Now at that time the mendicants who followed Assaji and Punabbasuka were
residing at
Kīṭāgiri.[1301](endnotes.xhtml_note-1301){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1301
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then several mendicants went up to them and
said, "Reverends, the Buddha abstains from eating at night, and so does
the mendicant Saṅgha. Doing so, they find that they're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. You too should abstain from
eating at night. Doing so, you'll find that you're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably."

When they said this, the mendicants who followed Assaji and Punabbasuka
said to them, "Reverends, we eat in the evening, the morning, and at the
wrong time of day. Doing so, we find that we're healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. Why should we give up what is
apparent in the present to chase after what takes effect over
time?[1302](endnotes.xhtml_note-1302){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1302
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We shall eat in the evening, the morning,
and at the wrong time of day."

Since those mendicants were unable to persuade the mendicants who were
followers of Assaji and Punabbasuka, they approached the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
the mendicants who follow Assaji and Punabbasuka that the teacher
summons them."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to those mendicants and said,
"Venerables, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," those mendicants replied. They went to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to them, "Is it really true, mendicants, that several
mendicants went to you and said: 'Reverends, the Buddha abstains from
eating at night, and so does the mendicant Saṅgha. Doing so, they find
that they're healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.
You too should abstain from eating at night. Doing so, you'll find that
you're healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.' When
they said this, did you really say to them: 'Reverends, we eat in the
evening, the morning, and at the wrong time of day. Doing so, we find
that we're healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. Why
should we give up what is apparent in the present to chase after what
takes effect over time? We shall eat in the evening, the morning, and at
the wrong time of day.'"

"Yes, sir."

"Mendicants, have you ever known me to teach the Dhamma like this: no
matter what this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---their unskillful qualities decline and their skillful
qualities
grow?"[1303](endnotes.xhtml_note-1303){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1303
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Haven't you known me to teach the Dhamma like this: 'When someone feels
this kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful
qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling,
unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. When someone
feels this kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities grow and
skillful qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of painful
feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. When
someone feels this kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities grow
and skillful qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of
neutral feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities
grow'?"[1304](endnotes.xhtml_note-1304){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1304
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! Now, suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood,
realized, and experienced this with
wisdom:[1305](endnotes.xhtml_note-1305){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1305
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'When someone feels this kind of pleasant
feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Not
knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should give up
this kind of pleasant feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels this kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful
qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should give up this kind of pleasant feeling.' Now,
suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this
with wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling,
unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Not knowing
this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should enter and
remain in that kind of pleasant feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful
qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should enter and remain in that kind of pleasant
feeling.'

Now, suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced
this with wisdom: 'When someone feels this kind of painful feeling,
unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Not knowing
this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should give up this
kind of painful feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels this kind of painful feeling, unskillful
qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should give up this kind of painful feeling.' Now,
suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this
with wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of painful feeling,
unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Not knowing
this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should enter and
remain in that kind of painful feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of painful feeling, unskillful
qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should enter and remain in that kind of painful
feeling.'

Now, suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced
this with wisdom: 'When someone feels this kind of neutral feeling,
unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Not knowing
this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should give up this
kind of neutral feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels this kind of neutral feeling, unskillful
qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should give up this kind of neutral feeling.' Now,
suppose I hadn't known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this
with wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of neutral feeling,
unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Not knowing
this, would it be appropriate for me to say: 'You should enter and
remain in that kind of neutral feeling'?"

"No, sir."

"But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with
wisdom: 'When someone feels that kind of neutral feeling, unskillful
qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.' Since this is so, that's
why I say: 'You should enter and remain in that kind of neutral
feeling.'

Mendicants, I don't say that all these mendicants still have work to do
with
diligence.[1306](endnotes.xhtml_note-1306){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1306
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nor do I say that all these mendicants have
no work to do with diligence. I say that mendicants don't have work to
do with diligence if they are perfected, with defilements ended, having
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and become rightly freed through enlightenment. Why is that?
They've done their work with diligence. They're incapable of being
negligent.

I say that mendicants still have work to do with diligence if they are
trainees, who haven't achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring
to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Why is that? Thinking:
'Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate
with good friends, and control their faculties. Then they might realize
the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and
live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.' Seeing this fruit
of diligence for those mendicants, I say that they still have work to do
with diligence.

Mendicants, these seven people are found in the world. What seven? One
freed both ways, one freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to
view, one freed by faith, a follower of teachings, and a follower by
faith.

And what person is freed both ways? It's a person who has direct
meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless,
transcending form. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements have
come to an
end.[1307](endnotes.xhtml_note-1307){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1307
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This person is called freed both ways. And
I say that this mendicant has no work to do with diligence. Why is that?
They've done their work with diligence. They're incapable of being
negligent.

And what person is freed by wisdom? It's a person who does not have
direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are
formless, transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom,
their defilements have come to an
end.[1308](endnotes.xhtml_note-1308){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1308
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This person is called freed by wisdom. I
say that this mendicant has no work to do with diligence. Why is that?
They've done their work with diligence. They're incapable of being
negligent.

And what person is a direct
witness?[1309](endnotes.xhtml_note-1309){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1309
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's a person who has direct meditative
experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending
form. And, having seen with wisdom, some of their defilements have come
to an end. This person is called a direct witness. I say that this
mendicant still has work to do with diligence. Why is that? Thinking:
'Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate
with good friends, and control their faculties. Then they might realize
the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and
live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.' Seeing this fruit
of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do
with diligence.

And what person is attained to view? It's a person who doesn't have
direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are
formless, transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom, some
of their defilements have come to an end. And they have clearly seen and
clearly contemplated with wisdom the teaching and training proclaimed by
the Realized One. This person is called attained to view. I say that
this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
Thinking: 'Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings,
associate with good friends, and control their faculties. Then they
might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very
life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.' Seeing
this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have
work to do with diligence.

And what person is freed by faith? It's a person who doesn't have direct
meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless,
transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom, some of their
defilements have come to an end. And their faith is settled, rooted, and
planted in the Realized One. This person is called freed by faith. I say
that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. Why is
that? Thinking: 'Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate
lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. Then
they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this
very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'
Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still
have work to do with diligence.

And what person is a follower of teachings? It's a person who doesn't
have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are
formless, transcending form. And having seen with wisdom, their
defilements have not come to an end. And they accept the teachings
proclaimed by the Realized One after deliberating them with a degree of
wisdom. And they have the following
qualities:[1310](endnotes.xhtml_note-1310){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1310
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. This person is called a follower of
teachings. I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with
diligence. Why is that? Thinking: 'Hopefully this venerable will
frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control
their faculties. Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the
spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.' Seeing this fruit of diligence for this
mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence.

And what person is a follower by faith? It's a person who doesn't have
direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are
formless, transcending form. And having seen with wisdom, their
defilements have not come to an end. And they have a degree of faith and
love for the Realized One. And they have the following qualities: the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom.[1311](endnotes.xhtml_note-1311){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1311
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This person is called a follower by faith.
I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. Why
is that? Thinking: 'Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate
lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. Then
they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this
very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'
Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still
have work to do with diligence.

Mendicants, I don't say that enlightenment is achieved right away.
Rather, enlightenment is achieved by gradual training, progress, and
practice.

And how is enlightenment achieved by gradual training, progress, and
practice? It's when someone in whom faith has arisen approaches a
teacher. They pay homage, actively listen, hear the teachings, remember
the teachings, reflect on their meaning, and accept them after
deliberation. Then enthusiasm springs up; they make an effort, weigh up,
and persevere. Persevering, they directly realize the ultimate truth,
and see it with penetrating
wisdom.[1312](endnotes.xhtml_note-1312){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1312
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, there has not been that
faith,[1313](endnotes.xhtml_note-1313){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1313
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that approaching, that paying homage, that
listening, that hearing the teachings, that remembering the teachings,
that reflecting on their meaning, that acceptance after deliberation,
that enthusiasm, that making an effort, that weighing up, or that
striving. You're on a bad path, mendicants! You're practicing the wrong
way\![1314](endnotes.xhtml_note-1314){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1314
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How far these futile men have strayed from
this teaching and training!

There is an exposition in four statements, which a sensible person would
quickly understand when it is
recited.[1315](endnotes.xhtml_note-1315){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1315
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall recite it for you, mendicants. Try
to understand it."

"Sir, who are we next to those who understand the
teaching?"[1316](endnotes.xhtml_note-1316){#mn-bhikkhuvagga.xhtml_noteref-1316
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Even with a teacher who values things of the flesh, is an heir in
things of the flesh, who lives caught up in things of the flesh, you
wouldn't get into such haggling: 'If we get this, we'll do that. If we
don't get this, we won't do it.' What then of the Realized One, who
lives utterly detached from things of the flesh?

For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher's
instructions, this is in line with the teaching: 'The Buddha is my
Teacher, I am his disciple. The Buddha knows, I do not know.' For a
faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher's
instructions, the Teacher's instructions are nourishing and nutritious.
For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher's
instructions, this is in line with the teaching: 'Gladly, let only skin,
sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body!
I will not relax my energy until I have achieved what is possible by
human strength, energy, and vigor.' For a faithful disciple who is
practicing to fathom the Teacher's instructions, one of two results can
be expected: enlightenment in the present life, or if there's something
left over, non-return."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Wanderers {#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_mn-paribbajakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn71">

### [MN 71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [To Vacchagotta on the Three Knowledges ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tevijjavacchasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1317](endnotes.xhtml_note-1317){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1317
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time the wanderer Vacchagotta was residing in the Single
Lotus Monastery of the
wanderers.[1318](endnotes.xhtml_note-1318){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1318
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to
wander for alms in Vesālī. Why don't I visit the wanderer Vacchagotta at
the Single Lotus Monastery?" So that's what he did.

Vacchagotta saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, and said to him,
"Let the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's
been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. Please,
sir, sit down, this seat is ready."

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while Vacchagotta took a low seat
and sat to one side. Then Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, I have heard
this:[1319](endnotes.xhtml_note-1319){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1319
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The ascetic Gotama claims to be
all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without
exception,
thus:[1320](endnotes.xhtml_note-1320){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1320
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Knowledge and vision are constantly and
continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and
waking."' I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has
said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation
in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal
and criticism?"

"Vaccha, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false and
untrue."[1321](endnotes.xhtml_note-1321){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1321
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"So how should we answer so as to repeat what the Buddha has said, and
not misrepresent him with an untruth? How should we explain in line with
his teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?"

"'The ascetic Gotama has the three knowledges.' Answering like this you
would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth.
You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no
legitimate grounds for rebuttal and
criticism.[1322](endnotes.xhtml_note-1322){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1322
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For, Vaccha, whenever I want, I recollect my many kinds of past lives.
That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the
world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the
world contracting and expanding. I remember: 'There, I was named this,
my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how
I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so I
recollect my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

And whenever I want, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

And I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. I live having realized it with my own insight due to
the ending of defilements.

'The ascetic Gotama has the three knowledges.' Answering like this you
would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth.
You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no
legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism."

When he said this, the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha, "Mister
Gotama, are there any laypeople who, without giving up the fetter of lay
life, make an end of suffering when the body breaks
up?"[1323](endnotes.xhtml_note-1323){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1323
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Vaccha."

"But are there any laypeople who, without giving up the fetter of lay
life, go to heaven when the body breaks up?"

"There's not just one hundred laypeople, Vaccha, or two or three or four
or five hundred, but many more than that who, without giving up the
fetter of lay life, go to heaven when the body breaks up."

"Mister Gotama, are there any Ājīvaka ascetics who make an end of
suffering when the body breaks up?"

"No, Vaccha."

"But are there any Ājīvaka ascetics who go to heaven when the body
breaks up?"

"Vaccha, when I recollect the past ninety-one eons, I can't find any
Ājīvaka ascetics who have gone to heaven, except
one;[1324](endnotes.xhtml_note-1324){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1324
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and he taught the efficacy of deeds and
action."[1325](endnotes.xhtml_note-1325){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1325
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In that case, Mister Gotama, that sectarian fold is empty even of the
chance to go to
heaven."[1326](endnotes.xhtml_note-1326){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1326
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, Vaccha, that sectarian fold is empty even of the chance to go to
heaven."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the wanderer Vacchagotta
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn72">

### [MN 72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vacchagotta on Fire ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggivacchasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1327](endnotes.xhtml_note-1327){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1327
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, is this your view: 'The cosmos is eternal. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is finite. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is infinite. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'The soul and the body are the same thing. This
is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'The soul and the body are different things.
This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'A realized one still exists after death. This
is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'A realized one no longer exists after death.
This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'A realized one both still exists and no longer
exists after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Then is this your view: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile'?"

"That's not my view, Vaccha."

"Mister Gotama, when asked these ten questions, you say: 'That's not my
view.' Seeing what drawback do you avoid all these convictions?"

"Each of these ten convictions is the thicket of views, the desert of
views, the twist of views, the dodge of views, the fetter of views.
They're beset with anguish, distress, and fever. They don't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. Seeing this drawback I avoid all these convictions."

"But does Mister Gotama have any convictions at all?"

"A realized one has done away with
convictions.[1328](endnotes.xhtml_note-1328){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1328
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For a realized one has seen: 'Such is form,
such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is feeling,
such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is
perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of
perception. Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the
ending of choices. Such is consciousness, such is the origin of
consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' That's why a
Realized One is freed with the ending, fading away, cessation, giving
up, and letting go of all conceiving, all churning, and all I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit, I
say."[1329](endnotes.xhtml_note-1329){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1329
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Mister Gotama, when a mendicant's mind is freed like this, where
are they reborn?"

"'They're reborn' doesn't apply, Vaccha."

"Well then, are they not reborn?"

"'They're not reborn' doesn't apply, Vaccha."

"Well then, are they both reborn and not reborn?"

"'They're both reborn and not reborn' doesn't apply, Vaccha."

"Well then, are they neither reborn nor not reborn?"

"'They're neither reborn nor not reborn' doesn't apply, Vaccha."

"Mister Gotama, when asked all these questions, you say: 'It doesn't
apply.' I fail to understand this point, Mister Gotama; I've fallen into
confusion. And I've now lost even the degree of clarity I had from
previous discussions with Mister Gotama."

"No wonder you don't understand, Vaccha, no wonder you're
confused.[1330](endnotes.xhtml_note-1330){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1330
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this principle is deep, hard to see,
hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic,
subtle, comprehensible to the astute. It's hard for you to understand,
since you have a different view, creed, and belief, unless you dedicate
yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition.

Well then, Vaccha, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer
as you
like.[1331](endnotes.xhtml_note-1331){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1331
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, Vaccha? Suppose a fire was burning in front of you.
Would you know: 'This fire is burning in front of me'?"

"Yes, I would, Mister Gotama."

"But Vaccha, suppose they were to ask you: 'This fire burning in front
of you: what does it depend on to burn?' How would you
answer?"[1332](endnotes.xhtml_note-1332){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1332
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I would answer like this: 'This fire burning in front of me burns in
dependence on grass and logs as
fuel.'"[1333](endnotes.xhtml_note-1333){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1333
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Suppose that fire burning in front of you was extinguished. Would you
know:[1334](endnotes.xhtml_note-1334){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1334
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This fire in front of me is quenched'?"

"Yes, I would, Mister Gotama."

"But Vaccha, suppose they were to ask you: 'This fire in front of you
that is quenched: in what direction did it go---east, south, west, or
north?' How would you answer?"

"It doesn't apply, Mister Gotama. The fire depended on grass and logs as
fuel. When that runs out, and no more fuel is added, the fire is
reckoned to have become quenched due to lack of fuel."

"In the same way, Vaccha, any form by which a realized one might be
described has been given up, cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the
future.[1335](endnotes.xhtml_note-1335){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1335
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A realized one is freed from reckoning in
terms of form. They're deep, immeasurable, and hard to fathom, like the
ocean. 'They're reborn', 'they're not reborn', 'they're both reborn and
not reborn', 'they're neither reborn nor not reborn'---none of these
apply.

Any feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness by which a
realized one might be described has been given up, cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
A realized one is freed from reckoning in terms of consciousness.
They're deep, immeasurable, and hard to fathom, like the ocean. 'They're
reborn', 'they're not reborn', 'they're both reborn and not reborn',
'they're neither reborn nor not reborn'---none of these apply."

When he said this, the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, suppose there was a large sal tree not far from a town
or village. And because it's impermanent, its branches and foliage, bark
and shoots, and softwood would fall off. After some time it would be rid
of branches and foliage, bark and shoots, and softwood, pure, and
consolidated in the core. In the same way, Mister Gotama's dispensation
is rid of branches and foliage, bark and shoots, and softwood, pure, and
consolidated in the core.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."[1336](endnotes.xhtml_note-1336){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1336
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn73">

### [MN 73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse With Vacchagotta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāvacchasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1337](endnotes.xhtml_note-1337){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1337
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, "For a long time I
have had discussions with Mister Gotama. Please teach me in brief what
is skillful and what is unskillful."

"Vaccha, I can teach you what is skillful and what is unskillful in
brief or in detail. Still, let me do so in brief. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Vaccha replied. The Buddha said this:

"Greed is unskillful, contentment is
skillful.[1338](endnotes.xhtml_note-1338){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1338
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Hate is unskillful, love is skillful.
Delusion is unskillful, understanding is skillful. So there are these
three unskillful things and three that are skillful.

Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and
wrong view: these things are unskillful. Refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment,
kind-heartedness, and right view: these things are skillful. So there
are these ten unskillful things and ten that are skillful.

When a mendicant has given up craving so it is cut off at the root, made
like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future, that
mendicant is perfected. They've ended the defilements, completed the
spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama, is there even a single monk disciple of
Mister Gotama who has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of
defilements?"[1339](endnotes.xhtml_note-1339){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1339
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are not just one hundred such monks who are my disciples, Vaccha,
or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama and the monks, is there even a single nun
disciple of Mister Gotama who has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements?"

"There are not just one hundred such nuns who are my disciples, Vaccha,
or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, and the nuns, is there even a
single layman disciple of Mister Gotama---white-clothed and
celibate---who, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn
spontaneously, to be extinguished there, not liable to return from that
world?"[1340](endnotes.xhtml_note-1340){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1340
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are not just one hundred such celibate laymen who are my
disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many
more than that."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, and the celibate
laymen, is there even a single layman disciple of Mister
Gotama---white-clothed, enjoying sensual pleasures, following
instructions, and responding to advice---who has gone beyond doubt, got
rid of indecision, and lives self-assured and independent of others
regarding the Teacher's
instruction?"[1341](endnotes.xhtml_note-1341){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1341
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are not just one hundred such laymen enjoying sensual pleasures
who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred,
but many more than that."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, the celibate laymen,
and the laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, is there even a single
laywoman disciple of Mister Gotama---white-clothed and celibate---who,
with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously, to
be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world?"

"There are not just one hundred such celibate laywomen who are my
disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many
more than that."

"Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, the celibate laymen,
the laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, and the celibate laywomen, is
there even a single laywoman disciple of Mister Gotama---white-clothed,
enjoying sensual pleasures, following instructions, and responding to
advice---who has gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and lives
self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher's
instruction?"

"There are not just one hundred such laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures
who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred,
but many more than that."

"If Mister Gotama was the only one to succeed in this teaching, not any
monks, then this spiritual path would be incomplete in that respect. But
because both Mister Gotama and monks have succeeded in this teaching,
this spiritual path is complete in that respect.

If Mister Gotama and the monks were the only ones to succeed in this
teaching, not any nuns ... celibate laymen ... laymen enjoying sensual
pleasures ... celibate laywomen ...

laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures, then this spiritual path would be
incomplete in that respect. But because Mister Gotama, monks, nuns,
celibate laymen, laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen,
and laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures have all succeeded in this
teaching, this spiritual path is complete in that respect.

Just as the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines towards the ocean,
and keeps pushing into the ocean, in the same way Mister Gotama's
assembly---with both laypeople and renunciates---slants, slopes, and
inclines towards extinguishment, and keeps pushing into extinguishment.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. May I receive the going forth,
the ordination in Mister Gotama's presence?"

"Vaccha, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the
going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into monkhood. However, I have recognized individual differences in this
matter."

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood." And the wanderer Vaccha received the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence.

Not long after his ordination, a fortnight later, Venerable Vacchagotta
went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir,
I've reached as far as possible with the knowledge and understanding of
a trainee. Please teach me further."

"Well then, Vaccha, further develop two things: serenity and
discernment. When you have further developed these two things, they'll
lead to the penetration of many elements.

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'May I wield the many kinds of
psychic power: multiplying myself and becoming one again; appearing and
disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a
mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it
were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged
through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun
and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling my body as far as the
Brahmā realm.'

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'With clairaudience that is purified
and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly,
whether near or far.'

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'May I understand the minds of other
beings and individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I
understand mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed
as "mind without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind
without hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with
delusion", and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion";
constricted mind as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered
mind"; expansive mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as
"unexpansive mind"; mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not
supreme", and mind that is supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind
immersed in samādhi as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed
in samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi"; freed mind as "freed
mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".'

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'May I recollect many kinds of past
lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of
the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of
the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named
this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This
was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I
passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I
was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my
food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life
ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I
recollect my many past lives, with features and details.'

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'With clairvoyance that is purified
and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place---and understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds: "These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and
they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of
body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had
right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their
body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm." And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.'

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since
each and every one is within range: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having
realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.'"

And then Venerable Vacchagotta approved and agreed with what the Buddha
said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then Vacchagotta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute,
soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life.
He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Vacchagotta became one of the perfected.

Now at that time several mendicants were going to see the Buddha.
Vacchagotta saw them coming off in the distance, went up to them, and
said, "Hello venerables, where are you going?"

"Reverend, we are going to see the Buddha."

"Well then, reverends, in my name please bow with your head at the
Buddha's feet and say: 'Sir, the mendicant Vacchagotta bows with his
head to your feet and says, "I have served the Blessed One! I have
served the Holy One!"'"

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Then those mendicants went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the
mendicant Vacchagotta bows with his head to your feet and says: 'I have
served the Blessed One! I have served the Holy One!'"

"I've already comprehended Vacchagotta's mind and understood that he has
the three knowledges, and is very mighty and powerful. And deities also
told me about
this."[1342](endnotes.xhtml_note-1342){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1342
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn74">

### [MN 74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Dīghanakha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dīghanakhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1343](endnotes.xhtml_note-1343){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1343
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain in the Boar's Cave.

Then the wanderer Dīghanakha went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with
him.[1344](endnotes.xhtml_note-1344){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1344
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama,
this is my doctrine and view: 'Nothing is acceptable to
me.'"[1345](endnotes.xhtml_note-1345){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1345
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This view of yours,
Aggivessana---[1346](endnotes.xhtml_note-1346){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1346
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} is that acceptable to
you?"[1347](endnotes.xhtml_note-1347){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1347
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"If I were to accept this view, Mister Gotama, it would make no
difference, it would make no difference!"

"Well, Aggivessana, there are many more in the world who say, 'It would
make no difference! It would make no difference!' But they don't give up
that view, and they grasp another view. And there are a scant few in the
world who say, 'It would make no difference! It would make no
difference!' And they give up that view by not grasping another view.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything is acceptable to me.' There are some ascetics and brahmins
who have this doctrine and view: 'Nothing is acceptable to me.' There
are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'Some
things are acceptable to me and some things are not.' Regarding this,
the view of the ascetics and brahmins to whom everything is acceptable
is close to greed, bondage, approving, attachment, and grasping. The
view of the ascetics and brahmins to whom nothing is acceptable is far
from greed, bondage, approving, attachment, and grasping."

When he said this, the wanderer Dīghanakha said to the Buddha, "Mister
Gotama commends my conviction! He recommends my conviction!"

"Now, regarding the ascetics and brahmins to whom some things are
acceptable and some things are not. Their view of what is acceptable is
close to greed, bondage, approving, attachment, and grasping. Their view
of what is not acceptable is far from greed, bondage, approving,
attachment, and grasping.

When it comes to the view of the ascetics and brahmins to whom
everything is acceptable, a sensible person reflects like this: 'I have
the view that everything is acceptable. Suppose I were to obstinately
stick to this view and insist, "This is the only truth, anything else is
futile." Then I'd argue with two people---an ascetic or brahmin to whom
nothing is acceptable, and an ascetic or brahmin to whom some things are
acceptable and some things are not. And when there's arguing, there's
quarreling; when there's quarreling there's anguish; and when there's
anguish there's harm.' So, considering in themselves the potential for
arguing, quarreling, anguish, and harm, they give up that view by not
grasping another view. That's how those views are given up and let go.

When it comes to the view of the ascetics and brahmins to whom nothing
is acceptable, a sensible person reflects like this: 'I have the view
that nothing is acceptable. Suppose I were to obstinately stick to this
view and insist, "This is the only truth, anything else is futile." Then
I'd argue with two people---an ascetic or brahmin to whom everything is
acceptable, and an ascetic or brahmin to whom some things are acceptable
and some things are not. And when there's arguing, there's quarreling;
when there's quarreling there's anguish; and when there's anguish
there's harm.' So, considering in themselves the potential for arguing,
quarreling, anguish, and harm, they give up that view by not grasping
another view. That's how those views are given up and let go.

When it comes to the view of the ascetics and brahmins to whom some
things are acceptable to me and some things are not, a sensible person
reflects like this: 'I have the view that some things are acceptable and
some things are not. Suppose I were to obstinately stick to this view
and insist, "This is the only truth, anything else is futile." Then I'd
argue with two people---an ascetic or brahmin to whom everything is
acceptable, and an ascetic or brahmin to whom nothing is acceptable. And
when there's arguing, there's quarreling; when there's quarreling
there's anguish; and when there's anguish there's harm.' So, considering
in themselves the potential for arguing, quarreling, anguish, and harm,
they give up that view by not grasping another view. That's how those
views are given up and let go.

Aggivessana, this body is physical. It's made up of the four principal
states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge,
liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and
destruction. You should see it as impermanent, as suffering, as
diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien,
as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. Doing so, you'll give up
desire, affection, and subservience to the
body.[1348](endnotes.xhtml_note-1348){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1348
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. At a
time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don't feel a painful or
neutral feeling; you only feel a pleasant feeling. At a time when you
feel a painful feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or neutral feeling;
you only feel a painful feeling. At a time when you feel a neutral
feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or painful feeling; you only feel a
neutral feeling.

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings are impermanent, conditioned,
dependently originated, liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with pleasant,
painful, and neutral feelings. Being disillusioned, desire fades away.
When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they know
they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

A mendicant whose mind is freed like this doesn't side with anyone or
dispute with anyone. They use the language of the world to communicate
without getting stuck on
it."[1349](endnotes.xhtml_note-1349){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1349
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was standing behind the Buddha
fanning him. Then he thought, "It seems the Buddha speaks of giving up
and letting go all these things through direct knowledge." Reflecting
like this, Venerable Sāriputta's mind was freed from the defilements by
not
grasping.[1350](endnotes.xhtml_note-1350){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1350
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the wanderer
Dīghanakha: "Everything that has a beginning has an end." Then
Dīghanakha saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. He said to
the Buddha:

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for
life."[1351](endnotes.xhtml_note-1351){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1351
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn75">

### [MN 75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Māgaṇḍiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Māgaṇḍiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1352](endnotes.xhtml_note-1352){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1352
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma, on a
grass mat in the fire chamber of a brahmin of the Bhāradvāja clan.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kammāsadamma for alms. He wandered for alms in Kammāsadamma.
After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to a certain
forest grove for the day's meditation. Having plunged deep into it, he
sat at the root of a certain tree to meditate.

Then as the wanderer Māgaṇḍiya was going for a walk he approached that
fire
chamber.[1353](endnotes.xhtml_note-1353){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1353
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw the grass mat spread out there and
asked the brahmin of the Bhāradvāja clan, "Mister Bhāradvāja, who has
this grass mat been spread out for? It looks like an ascetic's bed."

"There is the ascetic Gotama, a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family.
He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This bed has been spread for that Mister
Gotama."

"Well, it's a sad sight, Mister Bhāradvāja, a very sad sight indeed, to
see a bed for Mister Gotama, that
baby-killer!"[1354](endnotes.xhtml_note-1354){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1354
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Be careful what you say, Māgaṇḍiya, be careful what you say. Many
astute aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics are devoted to
Mister Gotama. They've been guided by him in the noble system, the
skillful teaching."

"Even if I was to see Mister Gotama face to face, Mister Bhāradvāja, I
would say to his face: 'The ascetic Gotama is a baby-killer.' Why is
that? For so it came to me while
sleeping."[1355](endnotes.xhtml_note-1355){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1355
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"If you don't mind, I'll tell the ascetic Gotama about this."

"Don't worry, Mister Bhāradvāja. You may tell him exactly what I've
said."

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
this discussion between the brahmin of the Bhāradvāja clan and the
wanderer Māgaṇḍiya. Coming out of retreat, he went to the brahmin's fire
chamber and sat on the grass mat. Then the brahmin of the Bhāradvāja
clan went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.
The Buddha said to him, "Bhāradvāja, did you have a discussion with the
wanderer Māgaṇḍiya about this grass mat?"

When he said this, the brahmin, shocked and awestruck, said to the
Buddha, "I wanted to mention this very thing to Mister Gotama, but you
brought it up before I had a chance."

But this conversation between the Buddha and the brahmin was left
unfinished. Then as the wanderer Māgaṇḍiya was going for a walk he
approached that fire chamber. He went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side, and the Buddha said to him:

"Māgaṇḍiya, the eye likes sights, it loves them and enjoys them. That's
been tamed, guarded, protected and restrained by the Realized One, and
he teaches Dhamma for its restraint. Is that what you were referring to
when you called me a baby-killer?"

"That's exactly what I was referring to. Why is that? For so it came to
me while sleeping."

"The ear likes sounds ... The nose likes smells ... The tongue likes
tastes ... The body likes touches ... The mind likes ideas, it loves
them and enjoys them. That's been tamed, guarded, protected and
restrained by the Realized One, and he teaches Dhamma for its restraint.
Is that what you were referring to when you called me a baby-killer?"

"That's exactly what I was referring to. Why is that? For so it came to
me while sleeping."

"What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Take someone who used to amuse themselves
with sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Some time later---having truly
understood the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of
sights, and having given up craving and dispelled passion for
sights---they would live rid of thirst, their mind peaceful inside. What
would you have to say to them, Māgaṇḍiya?"

"Nothing, Mister Gotama."

"What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Take someone who used to amuse themselves
with sounds known by the ear ... smells known by the nose ... tastes
known by the tongue ... touches known by the body, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Some time
later---having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape of touches, and having given up craving and
dispelled passion for touches---they would live rid of thirst, their
mind peaceful inside. What would you have to say to them, Māgaṇḍiya?"

"Nothing, Mister Gotama."

"Well, when I was still a layperson I used to amuse myself, supplied and
provided with sights known by the eye ... sounds known by the ear ...
smells known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches
known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
sensual, and arousing. I had three stilt longhouses---one for the rainy
season, one for the winter, and one for the summer. I stayed in a stilt
longhouse without coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy
season, where I was entertained by musicians---none of them men. Some
time later---having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape of sensual pleasures, and having given up craving
and dispelled passion for sensual pleasures---I live rid of thirst, my
mind peaceful inside. I see other sentient beings who are not free from
sensual pleasures being consumed by craving for sensual pleasures,
burning with passion for sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual
pleasures. I don't envy them, nor do I hope to enjoy that. Why is that?
Because there is a satisfaction that is apart from sensual pleasures and
unskillful qualities, which even equals heavenly
pleasure.[1356](endnotes.xhtml_note-1356){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1356
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Enjoying that satisfaction, I don't envy
what is inferior, nor do I hope to enjoy it.

Suppose there was a householder or a householder's child who was rich,
affluent, and wealthy. And they would amuse themselves, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. That is, sights
known by the eye ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. Having practiced good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, when their body breaks up, after death, they'd be reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the thirty-three.
There they'd amuse themselves in the Garden of Delight, escorted by a
band of nymphs, supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly
sensual stimulation. Then they'd see a householder or a householder's
child amusing themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation.

What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Would that god---amusing themselves in the
Garden of Delight, escorted by a band of nymphs, supplied and provided
with the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation---envy that
householder or householder's child their five kinds of human sensual
stimulation, or return to human sensual pleasures?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because heavenly sensual pleasures are
better than human sensual pleasures."

"In the same way, Māgaṇḍiya, when I was still a layperson I used to
entertain myself with sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ...
touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Some time later---having truly
understood the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of
sensual pleasures, and having given up craving and dispelled passion for
sensual pleasures---I live rid of thirst, my mind peaceful inside. I see
other sentient beings who are not free from sensual pleasures being
consumed by craving for sensual pleasures, burning with passion for
sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual pleasures. I don't envy them,
nor do I hope to enjoy that. Why is that? Because there is a
satisfaction that is apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful
qualities, which even equals heavenly pleasure. Enjoying that
satisfaction, I don't envy what is inferior, nor do I hope to enjoy it.

Suppose there was a person affected by leprosy, with sores and blisters
on their limbs. Being devoured by worms, scratching with their nails at
the opening of their wounds, they'd cauterize their body over a pit of
glowing
coals.[1357](endnotes.xhtml_note-1357){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1357
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their friends and colleagues, relatives and
kin would get a surgeon to treat them. The surgeon would make medicine
for them, and by using that they'd be cured of leprosy. They'd be
healthy, happy, autonomous, master of themselves, able to go where they
wanted. Then they'd see another person affected by leprosy, with sores
and blisters on their limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching with
their nails at the opening of their wounds, cauterizing their body over
a pit of glowing coals.

What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Would that person envy that other person
affected by leprosy for their pit of glowing coals or for taking
medicine?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because you need to take medicine only
when there's a disease. When there's no disease, there's no need for
medicine."

"In the same way, Māgaṇḍiya, when I was still a layperson I used to
entertain myself with sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ...
touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Some time later---having truly
understood the origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of
sensual pleasures, and having given up craving and dispelled passion for
sensual pleasures---I live rid of thirst, my mind peaceful inside. I see
other sentient beings who are not free from sensual pleasures being
consumed by craving for sensual pleasures, burning with passion for
sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual pleasures. I don't envy them,
nor do I hope to enjoy that. Why is that? Because there is a
satisfaction that is apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful
qualities, which even equals heavenly pleasure. Enjoying that
satisfaction, I don't envy what is inferior, nor do I hope to enjoy it.

Suppose there was a person affected by leprosy, with sores and blisters
on their limbs. Being devoured by worms, scratching with their nails at
the opening of their wounds, they'd cauterize their body over a pit of
glowing coals. Their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get
a surgeon to treat them. The surgeon would make medicine for them, and
by using that they'd be cured of leprosy. They'd be healthy, happy,
autonomous, master of themselves, able to go where they wanted. Two
strong men would grab them by the arms and drag them towards the pit of
glowing coals.

What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Wouldn't that person writhe and struggle
to and fro?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because that fire is really painful to
touch, fiercely burning and scorching."

"What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Is it only now that the fire is really
painful to touch, fiercely burning and scorching, or was it painful
previously as well?"

"That fire is painful now and it was also painful previously. That
person was affected by leprosy, with sores and blisters on their limbs.
Being devoured by worms, scratching with their nails at the opening of
their wounds, their sense faculties were impaired. So even though the
fire was actually painful to touch, they had a distorted perception that
it was pleasant."

"In the same way, sensual pleasures of the past, future, and present are
painful to touch, fiercely burning and scorching. These sentient beings
who are not free from sensual pleasures---being consumed by craving for
sensual pleasures, burning with passion for sensual pleasures---have
impaired sense faculties. So even though sensual pleasures are actually
painful to touch, they have a distorted perception that they are
pleasant.

Suppose there was a person affected by leprosy, with sores and blisters
on their limbs. Being devoured by worms, scratching with their nails at
the opening of their wounds, they're cauterizing their body over a pit
of glowing coals. The more they scratch their wounds and cauterize their
body, the more their wounds become foul, stinking, and infected. But
still, they derive a degree of pleasure and gratification from the
itchiness of their wounds. In the same way, I see other sentient beings
who are not free from sensual pleasures being consumed by craving for
sensual pleasures, burning with passion for sensual pleasures, indulging
in sensual pleasures. The more they indulge in sensual pleasures, the
more their craving for sensual pleasures grows, and the more they burn
with passion for sensual pleasures. But still, they derive a degree of
pleasure and gratification from the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Have you seen or heard of a king or a
royal minister of the past, future, or present, amusing themselves
supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation,
who---without giving up craving for sensual pleasures and dispelling
passion for sensual pleasures---lives rid of thirst, their mind peaceful
inside?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Good, Māgaṇḍiya. Neither have I. On the contrary, all the ascetics or
brahmins of the past, future, or present who live rid of thirst, their
minds peaceful inside, do so after truly understanding the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape of sensual pleasures, and
after giving up craving and dispelling passion for sensual pleasures."

Then on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

> "Freedom from disease is the ultimate
> blessing;[1358](endnotes.xhtml_note-1358){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1358
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> extinguishment, the ultimate happiness.\
> Of paths, the ultimate is eightfold---\
> it's safe, and leads to freedom from death."

When he said this, Māgaṇḍiya said to him, "It's incredible, Mister
Gotama, it's amazing! How well said this was by Mister Gotama! 'Freedom
from disease is the ultimate blessing; extinguishment, the ultimate
happiness.' I've also heard that wanderers of the past, the tutors of
tutors, said: 'Freedom from disease is the ultimate blessing;
extinguishment, the ultimate
happiness.'[1359](endnotes.xhtml_note-1359){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1359
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And it agrees, Mister Gotama."

"But Māgaṇḍiya, when you heard that wanderers of the past said this,
what is that freedom from disease? And what is that extinguishment?"
When he said this, Māgaṇḍiya stroked his own limbs with his hands,
saying:

"This is that freedom from disease, Mister Gotama, this is that
extinguishment! For I am now healthy and happy, and have no
afflictions."[1360](endnotes.xhtml_note-1360){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1360
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Māgaṇḍiya, suppose a person was blind from birth. They couldn't see
sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta. They
couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and sun.
They might hear a sighted person saying: 'White cloth is really nice,
it's attractive, stainless, and clean.' They'd go in search of white
cloth. But someone would cheat them with a dirty, soiled garment,
saying: 'Sir, here is a white cloth for you, it's attractive, stainless,
and clean.' They'd take it and put it on, expressing their gladness:
'White cloth is really nice, it's attractive, stainless, and clean.'

What do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Did that person blind from birth do this
knowing and seeing, or out of faith in the sighted person?"

"They did so not knowing or seeing, but out of faith in the sighted
person."

"In the same way, the wanderers of other religions are blind and
sightless. Not knowing freedom from disease and not seeing
extinguishment, they still recite this verse: 'Freedom from disease is
the ultimate blessing; extinguishment, the ultimate happiness.' For this
verse was recited by the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas of the
past:

> 'Freedom from disease is the ultimate blessing;\
> extinguishment, the ultimate happiness.\
> Of paths, the ultimate is eightfold---\
> it's safe, and leads to freedom from death.\'

These days it has gradually become a verse used by ordinary people. But
Māgaṇḍiya, this body is a disease, a boil, a dart, a misery, an
affliction. Yet you say of this body: 'This is that freedom from
disease, this is that extinguishment!' Māgaṇḍiya, you don't have the
noble vision by which you might know freedom from disease and see
extinguishment."

"I am quite confident that Mister Gotama is capable of teaching me so
that I can know freedom from disease and see extinguishment."

"Māgaṇḍiya, suppose a person was blind from birth. They couldn't see
sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta. They
couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and sun.
Their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to
treat them. The surgeon would make medicine for them, but when they used
it their eyes were not cured and they still could not see clearly. What
do you think, Māgaṇḍiya? Wouldn't that doctor just get weary and
frustrated?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, suppose I were to teach you the Dhamma, saying: 'This
is that freedom from disease, this is that extinguishment.' But you
might not know freedom from disease or see extinguishment, which would
be wearying and troublesome for me."

"I am quite confident that Mister Gotama is capable of teaching me so
that I can know freedom from disease and see extinguishment."

"Māgaṇḍiya, suppose a person was blind from birth. They couldn't see
sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta. They
couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and sun.
They might hear a sighted person saying: 'White cloth is really nice,
it's attractive, stainless, and clean.'

They'd go in search of white cloth. But someone would cheat them with a
dirty, soiled garment, saying: 'Sir, here is a white cloth for you, it's
attractive, stainless, and clean.' They'd take it and put it on. Their
friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to treat
them. The surgeon would make medicine for them: emetics, purgatives,
ointment, counter-ointment, or nasal treatment. And when they used it
their eyes would be cured so that they could see clearly. As soon as
their eyes were cured they'd lose all desire for that dirty, soiled
garment. Then they would consider that person to be no friend, but an
enemy, and might even think of murdering
them:[1361](endnotes.xhtml_note-1361){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1361
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'For such a long time I've been cheated,
tricked, and deceived by that person with this dirty, soiled garment
when he said, "Sir, here is a white cloth for you, it's attractive,
stainless, and clean."'

In the same way, Māgaṇḍiya, suppose I were to teach you the Dhamma,
saying: 'This is that freedom from disease, this is that
extinguishment.' You might know freedom from disease and see
extinguishment. And as soon as your vision arises you might give up
desire for the five grasping aggregates. And you might even think: 'For
such a long time I've been cheated, tricked, and deceived by this mind.
For what I have been grasping is only form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness. My grasping is a condition for continued
existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a
condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress to come to be. That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.'"

"I am quite confident that Mister Gotama is capable of teaching me so
that I can rise from this seat cured of blindness."

"Well then, Māgaṇḍiya, you should associate with true persons. When you
associate with true persons, you will hear the true teaching. When you
hear the true teaching, you'll practice in line with the teaching. When
you practice in line with the teaching, you'll know and see for
yourself: 'These are diseases, boils, and darts. And here is where
diseases, boils, and darts cease without anything left over.' When my
grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence
ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases."

When he said this, Māgaṇḍiya said to him, "Excellent, Mister Gotama!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama has
made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. May I receive the going
forth, the ordination in Mister Gotama's presence?"

"Māgaṇḍiya, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take
the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into monkhood. However, I have recognized individual differences in this
matter."

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

And the wanderer Māgaṇḍiya received the going forth, the ordination in
the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable
Māgaṇḍiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute,
realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very
life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Māgaṇḍiya became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="mn76">

### [MN 76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sandaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sandakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time the wanderer Sandaka was residing at the cave of the
wavy leaf fig tree together with a large assembly of around five hundred
wanderers.[1362](endnotes.xhtml_note-1362){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1362
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Ānanda came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants: "Come, reverends, let's go to the Devakata
Pool to see the
cave."[1363](endnotes.xhtml_note-1363){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1363
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Then Ānanda together with several
mendicants went to the Devakata Pool.

Now at that time, Sandaka and the large assembly of wanderers were
sitting together making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in
all kinds of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

Sandaka saw Ānanda coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The ascetic Ānanda,
a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming. He is included among the
disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing near
Kosambī.[1364](endnotes.xhtml_note-1364){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1364
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such venerables like the quiet, are
educated to be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that
our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach." Then those wanderers
fell silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the wanderer Sandaka, who said to him,
"Come, Mister Ānanda! Welcome, Mister Ānanda! It's been a long time
since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit down, this
seat is ready." Ānanda sat down on the seat spread out, while Sandaka
took a low seat and sat to one side. Ānanda said to Sandaka, "Sandaka,
what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"

"Mister Ānanda, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now.
It won't be hard for you to hear about that later. It'd be great if
Mister Ānanda himself would give a Dhamma talk explaining his own
tradition."

"Well then, Sandaka, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Sandaka. Venerable Ānanda said this:

"Sandaka, these things have been explained by the Blessed One, who knows
and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha: four ways that
negate the spiritual life, and four kinds of unreliable spiritual life.
A sensible person would, to the best of their ability, not practice such
spiritual paths, and if they did practice them, they wouldn't succeed in
the system of the skillful teaching."

"But Mister Ānanda, what are the four ways that negate the spiritual
life, and the four kinds of unreliable spiritual life?"

"Sandaka, take a certain teacher who has this doctrine and view:
'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such
thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And
there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly
practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their
own
insight.[1365](endnotes.xhtml_note-1365){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1365
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This person is made up of the four
principal states. When they die, the earth in their body merges and
coalesces with the substance of earth. The water in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of water. The fire in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of fire. The air in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of air. The faculties are transferred
to
space.[1366](endnotes.xhtml_note-1366){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1366
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Four men with a bier carry away the corpse.
Their footprints show the way to the cemetery. The bones become
bleached. Offerings dedicated to the gods end in ashes. Giving is a
doctrine for morons. When anyone affirms a positive teaching it's just
hollow, false nonsense. Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated
and destroyed when their body breaks up, and they don't exist after
death.'

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher has
such a doctrine and view. If what that teacher says is true, both I who
have not accomplished this and one who has accomplished it have attained
exactly the same level. Yet I'm not one who says that both of us are
annihilated and destroyed when our body breaks up, and we don't exist
after death. But it's superfluous for this teacher to go naked, shaven,
persisting in squatting, tearing out their hair and beard. For I'm
living at home with my children, using sandalwood imported from Kāsi,
wearing garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and accepting gold and
currency. Yet I'll have exactly the same destiny in the next life as
this teacher. What do I know or see that I should lead the spiritual
life under this teacher? This negates the spiritual life.' Realizing
this, they leave disappointed.

This is the first way that negates the spiritual life.

Furthermore, take a certain teacher who has this doctrine and view: 'The
one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture,
aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the
same. Nothing bad is done when they kill, steal, break into houses,
plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery,
commit adultery, and
lie.[1367](endnotes.xhtml_note-1367){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1367
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you were to reduce all the living
creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged
chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were to
go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and
torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that,
and no outcome of evil. If you were to go along the north bank of the
Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no
merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. In giving, self-control,
restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.'

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher has
such a doctrine and view. If what that teacher says is true, both I who
have not accomplished this and one who has accomplished it have attained
exactly the same level. Yet I'm not one who says that when both of us
act, nothing wrong is done. But it's superfluous for this teacher to go
naked, shaven, persisting in squatting, tearing out their hair and
beard. For I'm living at home with my children, using sandalwood
imported from Kāsi, wearing garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and
accepting gold and currency. Yet I'll have exactly the same destiny in
the next life as this teacher. What do I know or see that I should lead
the spiritual life under this teacher? This negates the spiritual life.'
Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the second way that negates the spiritual life.

Furthermore, take a certain teacher who has this doctrine and view:
'There is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient
beings.[1368](endnotes.xhtml_note-1368){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1368
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sentient beings are corrupted without cause
or reason. There's no cause or reason for the purification of sentient
beings. Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. There is
no power, no energy, no human strength or
vigor.[1369](endnotes.xhtml_note-1369){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1369
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} All sentient beings, all living creatures,
all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by
destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in
the six classes of rebirth.'

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher has
such a doctrine and view. If what that teacher says is true, both I who
have not accomplished this and one who has accomplished it have attained
exactly the same level. Yet I'm not one who says that both of us are
purified without cause or reason. But it's superfluous for this teacher
to go naked, shaven, persisting in squatting, tearing out their hair and
beard. For I'm living at home with my children, using sandalwood
imported from Kāsi, wearing garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and
accepting gold and currency. Yet I'll have exactly the same destiny in
the next life as this teacher. What do I know or see that I should lead
the spiritual life under this teacher? This negates the spiritual life.'
Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the third way that negates the spiritual life.

Furthermore, take a certain teacher who has this doctrine and view:
'There are these seven substances that are not made, not derived, not
created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing
firm like a
pillar.[1370](endnotes.xhtml_note-1370){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1370
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They don't move or deteriorate or obstruct
each other. They're unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and
pain to each other. What seven? The substances of earth, water, fire,
air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the seventh. These seven substances
are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren,
steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They don't move
or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They're unable to cause pleasure,
pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. And here there is no-one
who kills or who makes others kill; no-one who learns or who educates
others; no-one who understands or who helps others
understand.[1371](endnotes.xhtml_note-1371){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1371
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you chop off someone's head with a sharp
sword, you don't take anyone's life. The sword simply passes through the
gap between the seven substances. There are 1.4 million main wombs, and
6,000, and 600. There are 500 deeds, and five, and three. There are
deeds and half-deeds. There are 62 paths, 62 sub-eons, six classes of
rebirth, and eight stages in a person's life. There are 4,900 Ājīvaka
ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 naked ascetics. There are 2,000
faculties, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dust. There are seven
percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, and seven knotless
embryos. There are seven gods, seven humans, and seven goblins. There
are seven lakes, seven rivers, 700 rivers, seven cliffs, and 700 cliffs.
There are seven dreams and 700 dreams. There are 8.4 million great eons
through which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an
end of suffering. And here there is no such thing as this: "By this
precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual life I shall
force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds by
experiencing their results little by little"---for that cannot be.
Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a limited
period, so there's no increase or decrease, no getting better or worse.
It's like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away unraveling.
In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the astute will
make an end of suffering.'

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher has
such a doctrine and view. If what that teacher says is true, both I who
have not accomplished this and one who has accomplished it have attained
exactly the same level. Yet I'm not one who says that after
transmigrating both of us will make an end of suffering. But it's
superfluous for this teacher to go naked, shaven, persisting in
squatting, tearing out their hair and beard. For I'm living at home with
my children, using sandalwood imported from Kāsi, wearing garlands,
fragrance, and makeup, and accepting gold and currency. Yet I'll have
exactly the same destiny in the next life as this teacher. What do I
know or see that I should lead the spiritual life under this teacher?
This negates the spiritual life.' Realizing this, they leave
disappointed.

This is the fourth way that negates the spiritual life.

These are the four ways that negate the spiritual life that have been
explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha. A sensible person would, to the best of their
ability, not practice such spiritual paths, and if they did practice
them, they wouldn't succeed in the system of the skillful teaching."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing, how these four ways that
negate the spiritual life have been explained by the Buddha. But Mister
Ānanda, what are the four kinds of unreliable spiritual
life?"[1372](endnotes.xhtml_note-1372){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1372
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sandaka, take a certain teacher who claims to be all-knowing and
all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:
'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me,
while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' They enter an empty
house; they get no almsfood; a dog bites them; they encounter a wild
elephant, a wild horse, and a wild cow; they ask the name and clan of a
woman or man; they ask the name and path to a village or town. When
asked, 'Why is this?' they answer: 'I had to enter an empty house,
that's why I entered it. I had to get no almsfood, that's why I got
none. I had to get bitten by a dog, that's why I was bitten. I had to
encounter a wild elephant, a wild horse, and a wild cow, that's why I
encountered them. I had to ask the name and clan of a woman or man,
that's why I asked. I had to ask the name and path to a village or town,
that's why I
asked.'[1373](endnotes.xhtml_note-1373){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1373
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher
makes such a claim, but they answer in such a way. This spiritual life
is unreliable.' Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the first kind of unreliable spiritual life.

Furthermore, take another teacher who is an oral transmitter, who takes
oral transmission to be the
truth.[1374](endnotes.xhtml_note-1374){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1374
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They teach by oral transmission, by the
lineage of testament, by canonical authority. But when a teacher takes
oral transmission to be the truth, some of that is well learned, some
poorly learned, some true, and some otherwise.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher
takes oral transmission to be the truth. He teaches by oral
transmission, by the lineage of testament, by canonical authority. But
when a teacher takes oral transmission to be the truth, some of that is
well learned, some poorly learned, some true, and some otherwise. This
spiritual life is unreliable.' Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the second kind of unreliable spiritual life.

Furthermore, take another teacher who relies on logic and inquiry. They
teach what they have worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry,
expressing their own perspective. But when a teacher relies on logic and
inquiry, some of that is well reasoned, some poorly reasoned, some true,
and some otherwise.

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher
relies on logic and inquiry. They teach what they have worked out by
logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own perspective.
But when a teacher relies on logic and inquiry, some of that is well
reasoned, some poorly reasoned, some true, and some otherwise. This
spiritual life is unreliable.' Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the third kind of unreliable spiritual life.

Furthermore, take another teacher who is dull and stupid. Because of
that, whenever they're asked a question, they resort to verbal
flip-flops and endless
flip-flops:[1375](endnotes.xhtml_note-1375){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1375
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I don't say it's like this. I don't say
it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And
I don't deny it's not so.'

A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: 'This teacher is
dull and stupid. Because of that, whenever they're asked a question,
they resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops: "I don't say
it's like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise.
I don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so." This spiritual
life is unreliable.' Realizing this, they leave disappointed.

This is the fourth kind of unreliable spiritual life.

These are the four kinds of unreliable spiritual life that have been
explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha. A sensible person would, to the best of their
ability, not practice such spiritual paths, and if they did practice
them, they wouldn't complete the system of the skillful teaching."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing, how these four kinds of
unreliable spiritual life have been explained by the Buddha. But, Mister
Ānanda, what would a teacher say and explain so that a sensible person
would, to the best of their ability, practice such a spiritual path, and
once practicing it, they would complete the system of the skillful
teaching?"

"Sandaka, it's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. ... He gives up these five
hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. A sensible person would, to the best of their ability, lead
the spiritual life under a teacher who achieves such a high distinction,
and, once practicing it, they would complete the system of the skillful
teaching.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant ... enters and remains in the second absorption
...[1376](endnotes.xhtml_note-1376){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1376
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} third absorption ... fourth absorption. A
sensible person would, to the best of their ability, lead the spiritual
life under a teacher who achieves such a high distinction, and, once
practicing it, they would complete the system of the skillful teaching.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. ... They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. A sensible person would, to the best of their
ability, lead the spiritual life under a teacher who achieves such a
high distinction, and, once practicing it, they would complete the
system of the skillful teaching.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. ... They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. A
sensible person would, to the best of their ability, lead the spiritual
life under a teacher who achieves such a high distinction, and, once
practicing it, they would complete the system of the skillful teaching.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' A sensible person would, to the best of their ability,
lead the spiritual life under a teacher who achieves such a high
distinction, and, once practicing it, they would complete the system of
the skillful teaching."

"But Master Ānanda, when a mendicant is perfected---with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment---could they still enjoy sensual pleasures?"

"Sandaka, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't
transgress in five respects. A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay person. A mendicant
who is perfected can't transgress in these five respects."

"But Mister Ānanda, when a mendicant is perfected, would the knowledge
and vision that their defilements are ended be constantly and
continually present to them, while walking, standing, sleeping, and
waking?"

"Well then, Sandaka, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a simile
some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said. Suppose
there was a person whose hands and feet had been amputated. Would they
be aware that their hands and feet had been amputated constantly and
continually, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking? Or would
they be aware of it only when they checked it?"

"They wouldn't be aware of it constantly, only when they checked it."

"In the same way, when a mendicant is perfected, the knowledge and
vision that their defilements are ended is not constantly and
continually present to them, while walking, standing, sleeping, and
waking. Rather, they are aware of it only when they checked it."

"But Reverend Ānanda, in this teaching and training, how many are
emancipated?"[1377](endnotes.xhtml_note-1377){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1377
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are not just one hundred who are emancipated, Sandaka, or two or
three or four or five hundred, but many more than that in this teaching
and training."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing! Namely, that there's no
glorifying one's own teaching and putting down the teaching of others.
The Dhamma is taught in its own field, and so many emancipated are
recognized. But these Ājīvakas, sons of she whose sons are dead, glorify
themselves and put others down. And they only recognize three who have
been
emancipated:[1378](endnotes.xhtml_note-1378){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1378
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and the
bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla."

Then the wanderer Sandaka addressed his own assembly, "Go, good sirs.
The spiritual life is lived under the ascetic Gotama. It's not easy for
me to give up possessions, honor, or popularity now." And that's how the
wanderer Sandaka sent his own assembly to lead the spiritual life under
the Buddha.

</article>
<article id="mn77">

### [MN 77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse with Sakuludāyī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsakuludāyisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1379](endnotes.xhtml_note-1379){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1379
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the
monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground. They
included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known
wanderers.[1380](endnotes.xhtml_note-1380){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1380
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Rājagaha for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to
wander for alms in Rājagaha. Why don't I visit the wanderer Sakuludāyī
at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground?"

So the Buddha went to the monastery of the wanderers.

Now at that time, Sakuludāyī was sitting together with a large assembly
of wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all
kinds of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

Sakuludāyī saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. Here comes the
ascetic Gotama. The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. Hopefully
if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach." Then
those wanderers fell silent.

Then the Buddha approached Sakuludāyī, who said to him, "Let the Blessed
One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been a long time
since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit down, this
seat is ready." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while Sakuludāyī
took a low seat and sat to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "Udāyī, what were you sitting talking about just
now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

"Sir, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now. It won't
be hard for you to hear about that later.

Sir, a few days ago several ascetics and brahmins who follow various
other religions were sitting together at the debating hall, and this
discussion came up among them: 'The people of Aṅga and Magadha are so
fortunate, so very fortunate! For there are these ascetics and brahmins
who lead an order and a community, and teach a community. They're
well-known and famous religious founders, deemed holy by many people.
And they have come down for the rainy season residence at Rājagaha. They
include Pūraṇa Kassapa, the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, Ajita of the
hair blanket, Pakudha Kaccāyana, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, and the Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan. This ascetic Gotama also leads an order and
a community, and tutors a community. He's a well-known and famous
religious founder, deemed holy by many people. And he too has come down
for the rains residence at Rājagaha. Which of these ascetics and
brahmins is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by their
disciples? And how do their disciples, after honoring and respecting
them, remain loyal?'

Some of them said: 'This Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community,
and tutors a community. He's a well-known and famous religious founder,
deemed holy by many people. But he's not honored, respected, revered,
venerated, and esteemed by his disciples. And his disciples, not
honoring and respecting him, don't remain loyal to him. Once it so
happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. Then one of
his disciples made a noise, "My good sirs, don't ask Pūraṇa Kassapa
about that. He doesn't know that. I know it. Ask me about it, and I'll
answer you." Once it so happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa didn't get his way,
though he called out with raised arms, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make
a sound. They're not asking you, they're asking me! I'll answer you!"
Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine:
"You don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this
teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training?
You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you
don't. You said last what you should have said first. You said first
what you should have said last. What you've thought so much about has
been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine!
You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!" That's how
Pūraṇa Kassapa is not honored, respected, revered, venerated, and
esteemed by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring
and respecting him, don't remain loyal to him. Rather, he's reviled, and
rightly
so.'[1381](endnotes.xhtml_note-1381){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1381
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Others said: \'This bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla ... Ajita of the hair
blanket ... Pakudha Kaccāyana ... Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta ... The Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a
community. He's a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy
by many people. But he's not honored, respected, revered, and venerated
by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him,
don't remain loyal to him. Once it so happened that he was teaching an
assembly of many hundreds. Then one of his disciples made a noise, "My
good sirs, don't ask the Jain Ñātika about that. He doesn't know that. I
know it. Ask me about it, and I'll answer you." Once it so happened that
the Jain Ñātika didn't get his way, though he called out with raised
arms, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. They're not asking you,
they're asking me! I'll answer you!" Indeed, many of his disciples have
left him after refuting his doctrine: "You don't understand this
teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What,
you understand this teaching and training? You're practicing wrong. I'm
practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You said last what you
should have said first. You said first what you should have said last.
What you've thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is
refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're trapped; get yourself out of
this---if you can!" That's how the Jain Ñātika is not honored,
respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. On the contrary, his
disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don't remain loyal to him.
Rather, he's reviled, and rightly so.'

Others said: 'This ascetic Gotama leads an order and a community, and
tutors a community. He's a well-known and famous religious founder,
deemed holy by many people. He's honored, respected, revered, and
venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring and respecting
him, remain loyal to him. Once it so happened that he was teaching an
assembly of many hundreds. Then one of his disciples cleared their
throat. And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their
knee, to indicate, "Hush, venerable, don't make sound! Our teacher, the
Blessed One, is teaching!" While the ascetic Gotama is teaching an
assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing
or clearing their throats. That large crowd is poised expectantly at the
ready, thinking, "Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it."
It's like when there's a person at the crossroads pressing out pure
dwarf-bee
honey,[1382](endnotes.xhtml_note-1382){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1382
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and a large crowd is poised expectantly at
the ready. In the same way, while the ascetic Gotama is teaching an
assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing
or clearing their throats. That large crowd is poised expectantly at the
ready, thinking, "Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it."
Even when disciples of the ascetic Gotama, having clashed with their
spiritual companions, reject the training and return to a lesser life,
they speak only praise of the teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha.
They blame only themselves, not others: "We were unlucky, we had little
merit. For even after going forth in such a well explained teaching and
training we weren't able to practice for life the perfectly full and
pure spiritual
life."[1383](endnotes.xhtml_note-1383){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1383
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They become monastery workers or lay
followers, and they proceed having undertaken the five precepts. That's
how the ascetic Gotama is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by
his disciples. And that's how his disciples, honoring and respecting
him, remain loyal to him.'"

"But Udāyī, how many qualities do you see in me, because of which my
disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and after honoring
and respecting me, they remain loyal to me?"

"Sir, I see five such qualities in the
Buddha.[1384](endnotes.xhtml_note-1384){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1384
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five?

The Buddha eats little and praises eating little. This is the first such
quality I see in the Buddha.

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robe, and praises
such contentment. This is the second such quality I see in the Buddha.

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of almsfood, and
praises such contentment. This is the third such quality I see in the
Buddha.

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of lodging, and praises
such contentment. This is the fourth such quality I see in the Buddha.

Furthermore, the Buddha is secluded, and praises seclusion. This is the
fifth such quality I see in the Buddha.

These are the five qualities I see in the Buddha, because of which his
disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate him; and after honoring
and respecting him, they remain loyal to him."

"Suppose, Udāyī, my disciples were loyal to me because I eat little.
Well, there are disciples of mine who eat a cupful of food, or half a
cupful; they eat a wood apple, or half a wood apple. But sometimes I
even eat this bowl full to the brim, or even more. So if it were the
case that my disciples are loyal to me because I eat little, then those
disciples who eat even less would not be loyal to me.

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I'm content with any kind
of robe. Well, there are disciples of mine who have rag robes, wearing
shabby robes. They gather scraps from charnel grounds, rubbish dumps,
and shops, make them into a patchwork robe and wear it. But sometimes I
wear robes offered by householders that are strong, yet next to which
bottle-gourd down is
coarse.[1385](endnotes.xhtml_note-1385){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1385
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So if it were the case that my disciples
are loyal to me because I'm content with any kind of robe, then those
disciples who wear rag robes would not be loyal to me.

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I'm content with any kind
of almsfood. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat only almsfood,
wander indiscriminately for almsfood, happy to eat whatever they glean.
When they've entered an inhabited area, they don't consent when invited
to sit down. But sometimes I even eat by invitation boiled fine rice
with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces. So
if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I'm
content with any kind of almsfood, then those disciples who eat only
almsfood would not be loyal to me.

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I'm content with any kind
of lodging. Well, there are disciples of mine who stay at the root of a
tree, in the open air. For eight months they don't go under a roof. But
sometimes I even stay in bungalows, plastered inside and out,
draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. So if it were the
case that my disciples are loyal to me because I'm content with any kind
of lodging, then those disciples who stay at the root of a tree would
not be loyal to me.

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I'm secluded and I praise
seclusion. Well, there are disciples of mine who live in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings. Having ventured deep into remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest, they live there, coming down to the midst of
the Saṅgha each fortnight for the recitation of the monastic code. But
sometimes I live crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers
and their ministers, and monastics of other religions and their
disciples. So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me
because I'm secluded and praise seclusion, then those disciples who live
in the wilderness would not be loyal to me.

So, Udāyī, it's not because of these five qualities that my disciples
honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and after honoring and
respecting me, they remain loyal to me.

There are five other qualities because of which my disciples honor,
respect, revere, and venerate me; and after honoring and respecting me,
they remain loyal to me. What five?

Firstly, my disciples esteem me for the higher ethics: 'The ascetic
Gotama is ethical. He possesses the entire spectrum of ethical conduct
to the highest degree.' Since this is so, this is the first quality
because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and
vision: 'The ascetic Gotama only claims to know when he does in fact
know. He only claims to see when he really does see. He teaches based on
direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. He teaches based on
reason, not without reason. He teaches with a demonstrable basis, not
without
it.'[1386](endnotes.xhtml_note-1386){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1386
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since this is so, this is the second
quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my higher wisdom: 'The ascetic
Gotama is wise. He possesses the entire spectrum of wisdom to the
highest degree. It's not possible that he would fail to foresee grounds
for future criticism, or to legitimately and completely refute the
doctrines of others that come
up.'[1387](endnotes.xhtml_note-1387){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1387
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you think, Udāyī? Would my
disciples, knowing and seeing this, break in and interrupt me?"

"No, sir."

"That's because I don't expect to be instructed by my disciples.
Invariably, my disciples expect instruction from me.

Since this is so, this is the third quality because of which my
disciples are loyal to me.

Furthermore, my disciples come to me and ask how the noble truth of
suffering applies to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired.
And I provide them with a satisfying answer to their
question.[1388](endnotes.xhtml_note-1388){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1388
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They ask how the noble truths of the origin
of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering apply to the suffering in which they are
swamped and mired. And I provide them with satisfying answers to their
questions. Since this is so, this is the fourth quality because of which
my disciples are loyal to me.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.[1389](endnotes.xhtml_note-1389){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1389
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. And many of my
disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation
of
insight.[1390](endnotes.xhtml_note-1390){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1390
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the four right efforts. It's when a mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful
qualities that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not
lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. And many
of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the four bases of psychic power. It's when a mendicant
develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And many of my disciples
meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the five faculties. It's when a mendicant develops the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which
lead to peace and awakening. And many of my disciples meditate on that
having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the five powers. It's when a mendicant develops the powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which lead to peace
and awakening. And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained
perfection and consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the seven awakening factors. It's when a mendicant develops
the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. And many
of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the noble eightfold path. It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. And many of my
disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation
of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the eight
liberations.[1391](endnotes.xhtml_note-1391){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1391
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Having physical form, they see
forms.[1392](endnotes.xhtml_note-1392){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1392
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms
externally.[1393](endnotes.xhtml_note-1393){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1393
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second liberation.

They're focused only on
beauty.[1394](endnotes.xhtml_note-1394){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1394
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the eight dimensions of
mastery.[1395](endnotes.xhtml_note-1395){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1395
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both
pretty and
ugly.[1396](endnotes.xhtml_note-1396){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1396
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue
appearance.[1397](endnotes.xhtml_note-1397){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1397
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're like a flax flower that's blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that's
smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. In
the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms
externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Mastering them,
they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form
internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the seventh
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
eighth dimension of mastery.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the ten universal dimensions of meditation.

Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below,
across, undivided and limitless.

They perceive the meditation on universal water ... the meditation on
universal fire ... the meditation on universal air ... the meditation on
universal blue ... the meditation on universal yellow ... the meditation
on universal red ... the meditation on universal white ... the
meditation on universal space ... the meditation on universal
consciousness above, below, across, undivided and
limitless.[1398](endnotes.xhtml_note-1398){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1398
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to develop the four
absorptions.[1399](endnotes.xhtml_note-1399){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1399
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread
their body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of
the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion.[1400](endnotes.xhtml_note-1400){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1400
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or
their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it
little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder
is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out;
yet no moisture oozes
out.[1401](endnotes.xhtml_note-1401){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1401
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of seclusion.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to
time.[1402](endnotes.xhtml_note-1402){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1402
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the stream of cool water welling up in
the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake.
There's no part of the lake that's not spread through with cool
water.[1403](endnotes.xhtml_note-1403){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1403
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. It's
like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of
them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not soaked
with cool
water.[1404](endnotes.xhtml_note-1404){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1404
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright
mind.[1405](endnotes.xhtml_note-1405){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1405
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like someone sitting wrapped from head
to foot with white cloth. There's no part of the body that's not spread
over with white
cloth.[1406](endnotes.xhtml_note-1406){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1406
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, they sit spreading their
body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of the body that's
not spread with pure bright mind. And many of my disciples meditate on
that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to understand
this:[1407](endnotes.xhtml_note-1407){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1407
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This body of mine is physical. It's made
up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up
from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and
erosion, to breaking up and
destruction.[1408](endnotes.xhtml_note-1408){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1408
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this consciousness of mine is attached
to it, tied to
it.'[1409](endnotes.xhtml_note-1409){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1409
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a beryl gem that was
naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear,
endowed with all good qualities. And it was strung with a thread of
blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. And someone with clear eyes
were to take it in their hand and check it: 'This beryl gem is naturally
beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed
with all good qualities. And it's strung with a thread of blue, yellow,
red, white, or golden
brown.'[1410](endnotes.xhtml_note-1410){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1410
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they
use to understand this: 'This body of mine is physical. It's made up of
the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from
rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion,
to breaking up and destruction. And this consciousness of mine is
attached to it, tied to it.'

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to create from this body another body, consisting of form, mind-made,
whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any
faculty.[1411](endnotes.xhtml_note-1411){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1411
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose a person was to draw a reed out
from its sheath. They'd think: 'This is the reed, this is the sheath.
The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn
out from the sheath.' Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from
its scabbard. They'd think: 'This is the sword, this is the scabbard.
The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been
drawn out from the scabbard.' Or suppose a person was to draw a snake
out from its slough. They'd think: 'This is the snake, this is the
slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has
been drawn out from the slough.' In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another
body, consisting of form, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs,
not deficient in any faculty.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They
control the body as far as the Brahmā
realm.[1412](endnotes.xhtml_note-1412){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1412
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice
had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that
they
like.[1413](endnotes.xhtml_note-1413){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1413
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their
apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of
ivory item that they like. Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their
apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of
gold item that they
like.[1414](endnotes.xhtml_note-1414){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1414
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic
power ...

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear
both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.[1415](endnotes.xhtml_note-1415){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1415
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a powerful horn blower.
They'd easily make themselves heard in the four
quarters.[1416](endnotes.xhtml_note-1416){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1416
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is
purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and
heavenly, whether near or far.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own
mind.[1417](endnotes.xhtml_note-1417){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1417
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand mind with greed as 'mind
with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'; mind with
hate as 'mind with hate', and mind without hate as 'mind without hate';
mind with delusion as 'mind with delusion', and mind without delusion as
'mind without delusion'; constricted mind as 'constricted mind', and
scattered mind as 'scattered mind'; expansive mind as 'expansive mind',
and unexpansive mind as 'unexpansive mind'; mind that is not supreme as
'mind that is not supreme', and mind that is supreme as 'mind that is
supreme'; mind immersed in samādhi as 'mind immersed in samādhi', and
mind not immersed in samādhi as 'mind not immersed in samādhi'; freed
mind as 'freed mind', and unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'. Suppose there
was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and
they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl
of water. If they had a spot they'd know 'I have a spot', and if they
had no spots they'd know 'I have no
spots'.[1418](endnotes.xhtml_note-1418){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1418
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other
beings and individuals, having comprehended them with their own mind ...

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to recollect the many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many kinds of past
lives, with features and
details.[1419](endnotes.xhtml_note-1419){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1419
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose a person was to leave their home
village and go to another village. From that village they'd go to yet
another village. And from that village they'd return to their home
village. They'd think: 'I went from my home village to another village.
There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent
like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I
stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like
that. And from that village I returned to my home
village.'[1420](endnotes.xhtml_note-1420){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1420
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past
lives.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see
sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how
sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings
did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the
noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong
view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however,
did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill
of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of
that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their
deeds.[1421](endnotes.xhtml_note-1421){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1421
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there were two houses with doors. A
person with clear eyes standing in between them would see people
entering and leaving a house and wandering to and
fro.[1422](endnotes.xhtml_note-1422){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1422
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, I have explained to my
disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn ...

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use
to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of
defilements.[1423](endnotes.xhtml_note-1423){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1423
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a
lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear
eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles
and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They'd
think: 'This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the
clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming
about or staying
still.'[1424](endnotes.xhtml_note-1424){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1424
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they
use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and
consummation of insight.

This is the fifth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

These are the five qualities because of which my disciples honor,
respect, revere, and venerate me; and after honoring and respecting me,
they remain loyal to me."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the wanderer Sakuludāyī
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn78">

### [MN 78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Uggāhamāna Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇamuṇḍikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the wanderer Uggāhamāna Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta was residing
together with around five hundred wanderers in Mallikā's single-halled
monastery for philosophical debates, hedged by pale-moon ebony
trees.[1425](endnotes.xhtml_note-1425){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1425
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the chamberlain Pañcakaṅga left Sāvatthī in the middle of the day
to see the
Buddha.[1426](endnotes.xhtml_note-1426){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1426
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to
see the Buddha, as he's in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the
esteemed mendicants, as they're in retreat. Why don't I go to Mallikā's
monastery to visit the wanderer Uggāhamāna?" So that's what he did.

Now at that time, Uggāhamāna was sitting together with a large assembly
of wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all
kinds of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

Uggāhamāna saw Pañcakaṅga coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. Here comes
Pañcakaṅga, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama. He is included among the
white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing in
Sāvatthī. Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to be quiet, and
praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll
see fit to approach." Then those wanderers fell silent.

Then Pañcakaṅga approached Uggāhamāna, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side. Uggāhamāna said to him:

"Householder, when an individual has four qualities I describe them as
an invincible ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling in the
skillful, attained to the highest
attainment.[1427](endnotes.xhtml_note-1427){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1427
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? It's when they do no bad deeds
with their body; speak no bad words; think no bad thoughts; and don't
earn a living by bad livelihood. When an individual has these four
qualities I describe them as an invincible ascetic."

Then Pañcakaṅga neither approved nor dismissed that mendicant's
statement. He got up from his seat, thinking, "I will learn the meaning
of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed
the Buddha of all that had been discussed.

When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him, "Chamberlain, if what
Uggāhamāna says is true, a little baby boy is an invincible
ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling in the skillful,
attained to the highest attainment. For a little baby doesn't even have
a concept of 'a body', so how could they possibly do a bad deed with
their body, aside from just wriggling? And a little baby doesn't even
have a concept of 'speech', so how could they possibly speak bad words,
aside from just crying? And a little baby doesn't even have a concept of
'thought', so how could they possibly think bad thoughts, aside from
just whimpering? And a little baby doesn't even have a concept of
'livelihood', so how could they possibly earn a living by bad
livelihood, aside from their mother's breast? If what Uggāhamāna says is
true, a little baby boy is an invincible ascetic---accomplished in the
skillful, excelling in the skillful, attained to the highest attainment.

When an individual has four qualities I describe them, not as an
invincible ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling in the
skillful, attained to the highest attainment---but as having achieved
the same level as a little baby. What four? It's when they do no bad
deeds with their body; speak no bad words; think no bad thoughts; and
don't earn a living by bad livelihood. When an individual has these four
qualities I describe them, not as an invincible ascetic, but as having
achieved the same level as a little baby.

When an individual has ten qualities, chamberlain, I describe them as an
invincible ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling in the
skillful, attained to the highest attainment.

The following things must be understood, I say. 'These are unskillful
behaviors.' 'Unskillful behaviors stem from this.' 'Here unskillful
behaviors cease without anything left over.' 'Someone practicing like
this is practicing for the cessation of unskillful behaviors.'

'These are skillful behaviors.' 'Skillful behaviors stem from this.'
'Here skillful behaviors cease without anything left over.' 'Someone
practicing like this is practicing for the cessation of skillful
behaviors.'

'These are unskillful thoughts.' 'Unskillful thoughts stem from this.'
'Here unskillful thoughts cease without anything left over.' 'Someone
practicing like this is practicing for the cessation of unskillful
thoughts.'

'These are skillful thoughts.' 'Skillful thoughts stem from this.' 'Here
skillful thoughts cease without anything left over.' 'Someone practicing
like this is practicing for the cessation of skillful thoughts.'

And what, chamberlain, are unskillful behaviors? Unskillful deeds by way
of body and speech, and bad livelihood. These are called unskillful
behaviors.

And where do these unskillful behaviors stem from? Where they stem from
has been stated. You should say that they stem from the mind. What mind?
The mind takes many and diverse forms. But unskillful behaviors stem
from a mind that has greed, hate, and delusion.

And where do these unskillful behaviors cease without anything left
over? Their cessation has also been stated. It's when a mendicant gives
up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develops good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind; they give up wrong livelihood
and earn a living by right livelihood. This is where these unskillful
behaviors cease without anything left over.

And how is someone practicing for the cessation of unskillful behaviors?
It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given
up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are
completed by development. Someone practicing like this is practicing for
the cessation of unskillful behaviors.

And what are skillful behaviors? Skillful deeds by way of body and
speech, and purified livelihood are included in behavior, I say. These
are called skillful behaviors.

And where do these skillful behaviors stem from? Where they stem from
has been stated. You should say that they stem from the mind. What mind?
The mind takes many and diverse forms. But skillful behaviors stem from
a mind that is free from greed, hate, and delusion.

And where do these skillful behaviors cease without anything left over?
Their cessation has also been stated. It's when a mendicant behaves
ethically, but they are not determined by ethical
behavior.[1428](endnotes.xhtml_note-1428){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1428
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And they truly understand the freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom where these skillful behaviors cease without
anything left over.

And how is someone practicing for the cessation of skillful behaviors?
It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise ... so that unskillful qualities are given up ... so that skillful
qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain,
are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.
Someone practicing like this is practicing for the cessation of skillful
behaviors.

And what are unskillful thoughts? Thoughts of sensuality, of malice, and
of cruelty. These are called unskillful thoughts.

And where do these unskillful thoughts stem from? Where they stem from
has been stated. You should say that they stem from perception. What
perception? Perception takes many and diverse forms. Perceptions of
sensuality, malice, and cruelty---unskillful thoughts stem from this.

And where do these unskillful thoughts cease without anything left over?
Their cessation has also been stated. It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. This is where these unskillful thoughts cease without
anything left over.

And how is someone practicing for the cessation of unskillful thoughts?
It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise ... so that unskillful qualities are given up ... so that skillful
qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain,
are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.
Someone practicing like this is practicing for the cessation of
unskillful thoughts.

And what are skillful thoughts? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness. These are called skillful thoughts.

And where do these skillful thoughts stem from? Where they stem from has
been stated. You should say that they stem from perception. What
perception? Perception takes many and diverse forms. Perceptions of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness---skillful thoughts stem from
this.

And where do these skillful thoughts cease without anything left over?
Their cessation has also been stated. It's when, as the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and
remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born
of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is where these skillful thoughts
cease without anything left over.

And how is someone practicing for the cessation of skillful thoughts?
It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise ... so that unskillful qualities are given up ... so that skillful
qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain,
are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.
Someone practicing like this is practicing for the cessation of skillful
thoughts.

Chamberlain, when an individual has what ten qualities do I describe
them as an invincible ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling
in the skillful, attained to the highest attainment? It's when a
mendicant has an adept's right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. When an individual has
these ten qualities, I describe them as an invincible
ascetic---accomplished in the skillful, excelling in the skillful,
attained to the highest attainment."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Pañcakaṅga the chamberlain
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn79">

### [MN 79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse With Sakuludāyī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷasakuludāyisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at
that time the wanderer Sakuludāyī was residing together with a large
assembly of wanderers in the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks'
feeding ground.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Rājagaha for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to
wander for alms in Rājagaha. Why don't I visit the wanderer Sakuludāyī
at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground?" Then
the Buddha went to the monastery of the wanderers.

Now at that time, Sakuludāyī was sitting together with a large assembly
of wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all
kinds of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

Sakuludāyī saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, and hushed his own
assembly, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. Here comes the
ascetic Gotama. The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. Hopefully
if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach." Then
those wanderers fell silent.

Then the Buddha approached Sakuludāyī, who said to him, "Let the Blessed
One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been a long time
since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit down, this
seat is ready." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while Sakuludāyī
took a low seat and sat to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Udāyī,
what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"

"Sir, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now. It won't
be hard for you to hear about that later. When I don't come to the
assembly, they sit and engage in all kinds of low talk. But when I have
come to the assembly, they sit gazing up at my face alone,
thinking,[1429](endnotes.xhtml_note-1429){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1429
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Whatever the ascetic Udāyī teaches, we
shall listen to
it.'[1430](endnotes.xhtml_note-1430){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1430
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when the Buddha has come to the
assembly, both myself and the assembly sit gazing up at your face,
thinking, 'Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.'"

"Well then, Udāyī, suggest something for me to talk about."

"Mister Gotama, a few days ago someone was claiming to be all-knowing
and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:
'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me,
while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' When I asked them a
question about the past, they dodged the issue, distracted the
discussion with irrelevant points, and displayed annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. That reminded me of the
Buddha:[1431](endnotes.xhtml_note-1431){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1431
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Surely it must be the Blessed One, the
Holy One who is so skilled in such matters.'"

"But Udāyī, who was it that made such a claim and behaved in such a
way?"

"It was the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan,
sir."[1432](endnotes.xhtml_note-1432){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1432
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Udāyī, someone who can recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details, might ask me a question about the past, or I might
ask them a question about the past. And they might satisfy me with their
answer, or I might satisfy them with my answer.

Someone who, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds
might ask me a question about the future, or I might ask them a question
about the future. And they might satisfy me with their answer, or I
might satisfy them with my answer.

Nevertheless, Udāyī, leave aside the past and the future. I shall teach
you the Dhamma: 'When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this,
that
arises.[1433](endnotes.xhtml_note-1433){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1433
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When this doesn't exist, that is not; due
to the cessation of this, that ceases.'"

"Well sir, I can't even recall with features and details what I've
undergone in this
incarnation.[1434](endnotes.xhtml_note-1434){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1434
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How should I possibly recollect my many
kinds of past lives with features and details, like the Buddha? For I
can't even see a mud-goblin right
now.[1435](endnotes.xhtml_note-1435){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1435
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} How should I possibly, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, see sentient beings passing away and
being reborn, like the Buddha? But then the Buddha told me,
'Nevertheless, Udāyī, leave aside the past and the future. I shall teach
you the Dhamma:

"When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises.
When this doesn't exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that
ceases."' But that is even more unclear to me. Perhaps I might satisfy
the Buddha by answering a question about my own tradition."

"But Udāyī, what is your own tradition?"

"Sir, it's this: 'This is the ultimate splendor, this is the ultimate
splendor.'"[1436](endnotes.xhtml_note-1436){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1436
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what is that ultimate splendor?"

"Sir, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other
splendor is finer."

"But what is that ultimate splendor compared to which no other splendor
is finer?"

"Sir, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other
splendor is finer."

"Udāyī, you could draw this out for a long time. You say, 'The ultimate
splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.'
But you don't describe that splendor. Suppose a man was to say, 'Whoever
the finest lady in the land is, it is her that I want, her I desire!'
They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know whether she's an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant,
or a menial?' Asked this, he'd say, 'No.' They'd say to him, 'Mister,
that finest lady in the land who you desire---do you know her name or
clan? Whether she's tall or short or medium? Whether her skin is black,
brown, or tawny? What village, town, or city she comes from?' Asked
this, he'd say, 'No.' They'd say to him, 'Mister, do you desire someone
who you've never even known or seen?' Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Udāyī? This being so, doesn't that man's statement
turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, sir."

"In the same way, you say, 'The ultimate splendor is the splendor
compared to which no other splendor is finer.' But you don't describe
that splendor."

"Sir, suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked. When placed on a cream rug it would shine
and glow and radiate. Such is the splendor of the self that is free of
disease after
death."[1437](endnotes.xhtml_note-1437){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1437
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: such
a beryl gem, or a firefly in the dark of night?"

"A firefly in the dark of night, sir."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: a
firefly in the dark of night, or an oil lamp in the dark of night?"

"An oil lamp in the dark of night, sir."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: an
oil lamp in the dark of night, or a great mass of fire in the dark of
night?"

"A great mass of fire in the dark of night, sir."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: a
great mass of fire in the dark of night, or the Morning Star in the
clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn?"

"The Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of
dawn, sir."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: the
Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn, or
the full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the
fifteenth day sabbath?"

"The full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the
fifteenth day sabbath, sir."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Which of these two has a finer splendor: the
full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the
fifteenth day sabbath, or the sun at midday in the clear and cloudless
heavens in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn?"

"The sun at midday in the clear and cloudless heavens in the last month
of the rainy season, in autumn, sir."

"Beyond this, Udāyī, I know very many gods on whom the light of the sun
and moon make no
impression.[1438](endnotes.xhtml_note-1438){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1438
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, I do not say: 'The splendor
compared to which no other splendor is finer.' But of the splendor
inferior to a firefly you say, 'This is the ultimate splendor.' And you
don't describe that splendor."

"The Blessed One has cut short the discussion! The Holy One has cut
short the discussion!"

"But Udāyī, why do you say this?"

"Sir, it says this in our own tradition: 'This is the ultimate splendor,
this is the ultimate splendor.' But when pursued, pressed, and grilled
on our own tradition, we turned out to be vacuous, hollow, and
mistaken."

"But Udāyī, is there a world of perfect happiness? And is there a
grounded path for realizing a world of perfect happiness?"

"Sir, it says this in our own tradition: 'There is a world of perfect
happiness. And there is a grounded path for realizing a world of perfect
happiness.'"

"Well, what is that grounded path for realizing a world of perfect
happiness?"

"Sir, it's when someone gives up killing living creatures, stealing,
sexual misconduct, and lying. And they proceed having undertaken some
kind of
mortification.[1439](endnotes.xhtml_note-1439){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1439
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the grounded path for realizing a
world of perfect happiness."

"What do you think, Udāyī? On an occasion when someone refrains from
killing living creatures, is their self perfectly happy at that time, or
does it have both pleasure and pain?"

"It has both pleasure and pain."

"What do you think, Udāyī? On an occasion when someone refrains from
stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying, is their self perfectly happy
at that time, or does it have both pleasure and pain?"

"It has both pleasure and pain."

"What do you think, Udāyī? On an occasion when someone undertakes and
follows some kind of mortification, is their self perfectly happy at
that time, or does it have both pleasure and pain?"

"It has both pleasure and pain."

"What do you think, Udāyī? Is a perfectly happy world realized by
relying on a practice of mixed pleasure and pain?"

"The Blessed One has cut short the discussion! The Holy One has cut
short the discussion!"

"But Udāyī, why do you say this?"

"Sir, it says this in our own tradition: 'There is a world of perfect
happiness. And there is a grounded path for realizing a world of perfect
happiness.'[1440](endnotes.xhtml_note-1440){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1440
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when pursued, pressed, and grilled on
our own tradition, we turned out to be vacuous, hollow, and mistaken.

But sir, is there a world of perfect happiness? And is there a grounded
path for realizing a world of perfect happiness?"

"There is a world of perfect happiness, Udāyī. And there is a grounded
path for realizing a world of perfect happiness."

"Well sir, what is that grounded path for realizing a world of perfect
happiness?"

"It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption. With the fading away of
rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption. This is the
grounded path for realizing a world of perfect happiness."

"Sir, that's not the grounded path for realizing a world of perfect
happiness. At that point a perfectly happy world has already been
realized."

"No, Udāyī, at that point a perfectly happy world has not been realized.
This is the grounded path for realizing a world of perfect happiness."

When he said this, Sakuludāyī's assembly made an uproar, a dreadful
racket, "In that case, we're lost, and so are our traditional teachings!
We're lost, and so are our traditional teachings! We know nothing higher
than this!"

Then Sakuludāyī, having quieted those wanderers, said to the Buddha,
"Well sir, at what point is a perfectly happy world realized?"

"It's when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. There
are deities who have been reborn in a perfectly happy world. That
mendicant associates with them, converses, and engages in discussion.
It's at this point that a perfectly happy world has been realized."

"Surely the mendicants must lead the spiritual life under the Buddha for
the sake of realizing this perfectly happy world?"

"No, Udāyī, the mendicants don't lead the spiritual life under me for
the sake of realizing this perfectly happy world. There are other things
that are finer, for the sake of which the mendicants lead the spiritual
life under me."

"But what are those finer things?"

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. ...

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption.
This is one of the finer things for the sake of which the mendicants
lead the spiritual life under me.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This too is one of the finer
things.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features
and details. This too is one of the finer things.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. This
too is one of the finer things.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This too is one of the finer things. These are the
finer things for the sake of which the mendicants lead the spiritual
life under me."

When he had spoken, Sakuludāyī said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made
the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the going
forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

When he said this, Sakuludāyī's assembly said to him, "Mister Udāyī,
don't lead the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama. You have been a
tutor; don't live as a student. You'll end up like a water jar that
turns into a water
ladle.[1441](endnotes.xhtml_note-1441){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1441
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mister Udāyī, don't lead the spiritual life
under the ascetic Gotama. You have been a tutor; don't live as a
student." And that's how the wanderer Sakuludāyī's own assembly
prevented him from leading the spiritual life under the Buddha.

</article>
<article id="mn80">

### [MN 80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vekhanasa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vekhanasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the wanderer Vekhanasa went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with
him.[1442](endnotes.xhtml_note-1442){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1442
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment:
"This is the ultimate splendor, this is the ultimate
splendor."[1443](endnotes.xhtml_note-1443){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1443
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Kaccāna, why do you say: 'This is the ultimate splendor, this is
the ultimate splendor.' What is that ultimate splendor?"

"Mister Gotama, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which
no other splendor is finer."

"But what is that ultimate splendor compared to which no other splendor
is finer?"

"Mister Gotama, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which
no other splendor is finer."

"Kaccāna, you could draw this out for a long time. You say, 'The
ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is
finer.' But you don't describe that splendor.

Suppose a man was to say, 'Whoever the finest lady in the land is, it is
her that I want, her I desire!'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know whether she's an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant,
or a menial?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'No.'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, that finest lady in the land who you
desire---do you know her name or clan? Whether she's tall or short or
medium? Whether her skin is black, brown, or tawny? What village, town,
or city she comes from?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'No.'

They'd say to him, 'Mister, do you desire someone who you've never even
known or seen?'

Asked this, he'd say, 'Yes.'

What do you think, Kaccāna? This being so, doesn't that man's statement
turn out to have no demonstrable basis?"

"Clearly that's the case, Mister Gotama."

"In the same way, you say, 'The ultimate splendor is the splendor
compared to which no other splendor is finer.' But you don't describe
that splendor."

"Mister Gotama, suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally
beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked. When placed on a cream rug it
would shine and glow and radiate. Such is the splendor of the self that
is free of disease after death."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor:
such a beryl gem, or a firefly in the dark of night?"

"A firefly in the dark of night."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor: a
firefly in the dark of night, or an oil lamp in the dark of night?"

"An oil lamp in the dark of night."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor: an
oil lamp in the dark of night, or a great mass of fire in the dark of
night?"

"A great mass of fire in the dark of night."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor: a
great mass of fire in the dark of night, or the Morning Star in the
clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn?"

"The Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of
dawn."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor:
the Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of
dawn, or the full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on
the fifteenth day sabbath?"

"The full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the
fifteenth day sabbath."

"What do you think, Kaccāna? Which of these two has a finer splendor:
the full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the
fifteenth day sabbath, or the sun at midday in the clear and cloudless
heavens in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn?"

"The sun at midday in the clear and cloudless heavens in the last month
of the rainy season, in autumn."

"Beyond this, Kaccāna, I know very many gods on whom the light of the
sun and moon make no impression. Nevertheless, I do not say: 'The
splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.' But of the
splendor inferior to a firefly you say, 'This is the ultimate splendor.'
And you don't describe that splendor.

Kaccāna, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five?
Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The pleasure and happiness that arises from these five kinds of sensual
stimulation is called sensual pleasure. 'From the senses comes sensual
pleasure. Beyond sensual pleasure is the pleasure that surmounts the
sensual, which is said to be the best of
these.'[1444](endnotes.xhtml_note-1444){#mn-paribbajakavagga.xhtml_noteref-1444
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Vekhanasa said to the Buddha, "It's incredible,
Mister Gotama, it's amazing! How well said this was by Mister Gotama!
'From the senses comes sensual pleasure. Beyond sensual pleasure is the
pleasure that surmounts the sensual, which is said to be the best of
these.' Mister Gotama, from the senses comes sensual pleasure. Beyond
sensual pleasure is the pleasure that surmounts the sensual, which is
said to be the best of these."

"Kaccāna, since you have a different view, creed, and belief, then,
unless you dedicate yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition,
it's hard for to understand the senses, sensual pleasure, and the
pleasure that surmounts the sensual. There are mendicants who are
perfected, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are
rightly freed through enlightenment. They can understand the senses,
sensual pleasure, and the pleasure that surmounts the sensual."

When he said this, Vekhanasa became angry and upset. He even attacked
and badmouthed the Buddha himself, saying, "The ascetic Gotama will be
worsted!" He said to the Buddha, "This is exactly what happens with some
ascetics and brahmins. Not knowing the past or seeing the future, they
nevertheless claim: 'We understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place.'" Their statement turns out to be a
joke---mere words, vacuous and hollow."

"Kaccāna, there are some ascetics and brahmins who, not knowing the past
or seeing the future, nevertheless claim: 'We understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place.'" There is a
legitimate refutation of them. Nevertheless, Kaccāna, leave aside the
past and the future. Let a sensible person come---neither devious nor
deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and instruct them. Practicing
as instructed they will soon know and see for themselves, 'So this is
how to be rightly released from the bond, that is, the bond of
ignorance.' Suppose there was a little baby bound with swaddling up to
the neck. As they grow up and their senses mature, they're accordingly
released from those bonds. They'd know 'I'm released,' and there would
be no more bonds.

In the same way, let a sensible person come---neither devious nor
deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and instruct them. Practicing
as instructed they will soon know and see for themselves, 'So this is
how to be rightly released from the bond, that is, the bond of
ignorance.'"

When he said this, Vekhanasa said to the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister
Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#mn-rajavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Kings {#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_mn-rajavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn81">

### [MN 81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ghaṭīkāra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ghaṭikārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1445](endnotes.xhtml_note-1445){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1445
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants. Then the Buddha left the road, and at a certain spot he
smiled.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "What is the cause, what is the reason
why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

So Ānanda arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms
toward the Buddha, and said, "What is the cause, what is the reason why
the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

"Once upon a time, Ānanda, there was a market town in this spot named
Vebhaliṅga. It was successful and prosperous, populous, full of
people.[1446](endnotes.xhtml_note-1446){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1446
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And Kassapa, a blessed one, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha, lived supported by Vebhaliṅga. It was
here, in fact, that he had his monastery, where he advised the mendicant
Saṅgha while seated."

Then Ānanda spread out his outer robe folded in four and said to the
Buddha, "Well then, sir, may the Blessed One sit here! Then this piece
of land will have been occupied by two perfected ones, fully awakened
Buddhas." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out. When he was seated he
said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Once upon a time, Ānanda, there was a market town in this spot named
Vebhaliṅga. It was successful and prosperous, populous, full of people.
And Kassapa, a blessed one, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha,
lived supported by Vebhaliṅga. It was here, in fact, that he had his
monastery, where he advised the mendicant Saṅgha while seated.

The Buddha Kassapa had as chief supporter in Vebhaliṅga a potter named
Ghaṭīkāra. Ghaṭīkāra had a dear friend named Jotipāla, a brahmin
student.[1447](endnotes.xhtml_note-1447){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1447
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Ghaṭīkāra addressed Jotipāla, 'Come,
dear Jotipāla, let's go to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the perfected
one, the fully awakened
Buddha.[1448](endnotes.xhtml_note-1448){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1448
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For I deem it holy to see that Blessed
One.'[1449](endnotes.xhtml_note-1449){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1449
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, Jotipāla said to him, 'Enough, dear Ghaṭīkāra. What's
the use of seeing that shaveling, that fake ascetic?'

For a second time ... and a third time, Ghaṭīkāra addressed Jotipāla,
'Come, dear Jotipāla, let's go to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. For I deem it holy to see that
Blessed One.'

For a third time, Jotipāla said to him, 'Enough, dear Ghaṭīkāra. What's
the use of seeing that shaveling, that fake ascetic?'

'Well then, dear Jotipāla, let's take some bathing cleanser and go to
the river to
bathe.'[1450](endnotes.xhtml_note-1450){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1450
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Yes, dear,' replied Jotipāla. So that's what they did.

Then Ghaṭīkāra addressed Jotipāla, 'Dear Jotipāla, the Buddha Kassapa's
monastery is not far away. Let's go to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. For I deem it holy to see that
Blessed One.'

When he said this, Jotipāla said to him, 'Enough, dear Ghaṭīkāra. What's
the use of seeing that shaveling, that fake ascetic?'

For a second time ... and a third time, Ghaṭīkāra addressed Jotipāla,
'Dear Jotipāla, the Buddha Kassapa's monastery is not far away. Let's go
to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. For I deem it holy to see that Blessed One.'

For a third time, Jotipāla said to him, 'Enough, dear Ghaṭīkāra. What's
the use of seeing that shaveling, that fake ascetic?'

Then Ghaṭīkāra grabbed Jotipāla by the skirt-hem and
said,[1451](endnotes.xhtml_note-1451){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1451
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Dear Jotipāla, the Buddha Kassapa's
monastery is not far away. Let's go to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. For I deem it holy to see that
Blessed One.'

So Jotipāla undid his skirt-hem and said to
Ghaṭīkāra,[1452](endnotes.xhtml_note-1452){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1452
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Enough, dear Ghaṭīkāra. What's the use of
seeing that shaveling, that fake ascetic?'

Then Ghaṭīkāra grabbed Jotipāla by the hair of his freshly-washed head
and
said,[1453](endnotes.xhtml_note-1453){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1453
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Dear Jotipāla, the Buddha Kassapa's
monastery is not far away. Let's go to see the Blessed One Kassapa, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. For I deem it holy to see that
Blessed One.'

Then Jotipāla thought, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing, how this potter
Ghaṭīkāra, though of lowly birth, should presume to grab me by the hair
of my freshly-washed
head\![1454](endnotes.xhtml_note-1454){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1454
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This must be no ordinary matter.' He said
to Ghaṭīkāra, 'You'd even milk it to this extent, dear
Ghaṭīkāra?'[1455](endnotes.xhtml_note-1455){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1455
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'I even milk it to this extent, dear Jotipāla. For that is how holy I
deem it to see that Blessed One.'

'Well then, dear Ghaṭīkāra, release me, we shall go.'

Then Ghaṭīkāra the potter and Jotipāla the brahmin student went to the
Buddha Kassapa. Ghaṭīkāra bowed and sat down to one side, but Jotipāla
exchanged greetings with the Buddha and sat down to one side.

Ghaṭīkāra said to the Buddha Kassapa, 'Sir, this is my dear friend
Jotipāla, a brahmin student. Please teach him the Dhamma.' Then the
Buddha Kassapa educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Ghaṭīkāra
and Jotipāla with a Dhamma talk. Then they got up from their seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha Kassapa, keeping him on their
right, before leaving.

Then Jotipāla said to Ghatīkāra, 'Dear Ghaṭīkāra, you have heard this
teaching, so why don't you go forth from the lay life to homelessness?'

'Don't you know, dear Jotipāla, that I look after my blind old parents?'

'Well then, dear Ghaṭīkāra, I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.'

Then Ghaṭīkāra and Jotipāla went to the Buddha Kassapa, bowed and sat
down to one side. Ghaṭīkāra said to the Buddha Kassapa, 'Sir, this is my
dear friend Jotipāla, a brahmin student. Please give him the going
forth.' And Jotipāla the brahmin student received the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence.

Not long after Jotipāla's ordination, a fortnight later, the Buddha
Kassapa---having stayed in Vebhaliṅga as long as he pleased---set out
for
Varanasi.[1456](endnotes.xhtml_note-1456){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1456
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at
Varanasi, where he stayed near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.
King Kikī of Kāsi heard that he had
arrived.[1457](endnotes.xhtml_note-1457){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1457
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He had the finest carriages harnessed. He
then mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set
out in full royal pomp from Varanasi to see the Buddha Kassapa. He went
by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached
the Buddha Kassapa on foot. He bowed and sat down to one side. The
Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma
talk.

Then King Kikī said to the Buddha, 'Sir, would the Buddha together with
the mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's meal from me?' The Buddha
Kassapa consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, King Kikī got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving. And when the night had passed, King Kikī had
delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home---soft saffron
rice with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces.
Then he had the Buddha informed of the time,
saying,[1458](endnotes.xhtml_note-1458){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1458
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sir, it's time. The meal is ready.'

Then Kassapa Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of King Kikī, where he sat on the seat spread
out, together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Then King Kikī served and
satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands
with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha Kassapa had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, King
Kikī took a low seat and sat to one side. There he said to the Buddha
Kassapa, 'Sir, may the Buddha please accept my invitation to reside in
Varanasi for the rainy season. The Saṅgha will be looked after in the
same
style.'[1459](endnotes.xhtml_note-1459){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1459
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Enough, great king. I have already accepted an invitation for the rains
residence.'

For a second time ... and a third time King Kikī said to the Buddha
Kassapa, 'Sir, may the Buddha please accept my invitation to reside in
Varanasi for the rainy season. The Saṅgha will be looked after in the
same style.'

'Enough, Great King. I have already accepted an invitation for the rains
residence.'

Then King Kikī, thinking, 'The Buddha does not accept my invitation to
reside for the rains in Varanasi,' became sad and upset. Then King Kikī
said to the Buddha Kassapa, 'Sir, do you have another supporter better
than
me?'[1460](endnotes.xhtml_note-1460){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1460
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Great king, there is a village or town named Vebhaliṅga, where there is
a potter named Ghaṭīkāra. He is my chief supporter. Now, great king,
when you thought, "The Buddha does not accept my invitation to reside
for the rains in Varanasi," you became sad and upset. But Ghaṭīkāra
doesn't get upset, nor will he.

Ghaṭīkāra has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha. He doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or take alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. He has
experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and
has the ethics loved by the noble ones. He is free of doubt regarding
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[1461](endnotes.xhtml_note-1461){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1461
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He eats in one part of the day; he's
celibate, ethical, and of good
character.[1462](endnotes.xhtml_note-1462){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1462
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has set aside gems and gold, and
rejected gold and
currency.[1463](endnotes.xhtml_note-1463){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1463
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has put down the shovel and doesn't dig
the earth with his own
hands.[1464](endnotes.xhtml_note-1464){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1464
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He takes what has crumbled off by a
riverbank or been dug up by mice, and brings it back in a carrier. When
he has made a pot, he says, "Anyone may leave bagged sesame, mung beans,
or chickpeas here and take what they
wish."[1465](endnotes.xhtml_note-1465){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1465
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He looks after his blind old parents. And
since he has ended the five lower fetters, Ghaṭīkāra will be reborn
spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return
from that
world.[1466](endnotes.xhtml_note-1466){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1466
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This one time, great king, I was staying near the market town of
Vebhaliṅga. Then I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe,
went to the home of Ghaṭīkāra's parents, where I said to them, "Excuse
me, where has Bhaggava
gone?"[1467](endnotes.xhtml_note-1467){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1467
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Your supporter has gone out, sir. But take rice from the pot and sauce
from the pan and eat." So that's what I did. And after eating I got up
from my seat and
left.[1468](endnotes.xhtml_note-1468){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1468
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Ghaṭīkāra went up to his parents and said, "Who took rice from the
pot and sauce from the pan, ate it, and left?"

"It was the Buddha Kassapa, my dear."

Then Ghaṭīkāra thought, "I'm so fortunate, so very fortunate, in that
the Buddha Kassapa trusts me so much!" Then joy and happiness did not
leave him for a fortnight, or his parents for a week.

Another time, great king, I was staying near that same market town of
Vebhaliṅga. Then I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe,
went to the home of Ghaṭīkāra's parents, where I said to them, "Excuse
me, where has Bhaggava gone?"

"Your supporter has gone out, sir. But take porridge from the pot and
sauce from the pan and eat." So that's what I did. And after eating I
got up from my seat and left.

Then Ghaṭīkāra went up to his parents and said, "Who took porridge from
the pot and sauce from the pan, ate it, and left?"

"It was the Buddha Kassapa, my dear."

Then Ghaṭīkāra thought, "I'm so fortunate, so very fortunate, to be
trusted so much by the Buddha Kassapa!" Then joy and happiness did not
leave him for a fortnight, or his parents for a week.

Another time, great king, I was staying near that same market town of
Vebhaliṅga. Now at that time my hut leaked. So I addressed the
mendicants,

"Mendicants, go to Ghaṭīkāra's home and find some grass."

When I said this, those mendicants said to me, "Sir, there's no grass
there, but his workshop has a grass
roof."[1469](endnotes.xhtml_note-1469){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1469
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Then go to the workshop and strip the grass." So that's what they did.

Then Ghaṭīkāra's parents said to those mendicants, "Who's stripping the
grass from the workshop?"

"It's the mendicants, sister. The Buddha's hut is leaking."

"Take it, sirs! Take it, dearest ones!"

Then Ghaṭīkāra went up to his parents and said, "Who stripped the grass
from the workshop?"

"It was the mendicants, dear. It seems the Buddha's hut is leaking."

Then Ghaṭīkāra thought, "I'm so fortunate, so very fortunate, to be
trusted so much by the Buddha Kassapa!" Then joy and happiness did not
leave him for a fortnight, or his parents for a week.

Then the workshop remained with the atmosphere for a roof for the whole
three months, but the heavens did not rain on it. And that, great king,
is what Ghaṭīkāra the potter is like.'

'Ghaṭīkāra the potter is fortunate, very fortunate, to be so trusted by
the Buddha Kassapa.'

Then King Kikī sent around five hundred cartloads of rice, soft saffron
rice, and suitable sauce to
Ghaṭīkāra.[1470](endnotes.xhtml_note-1470){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1470
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then one of the king's men approached
Ghaṭīkāra and said, 'Sir, these five hundred cartloads of rice, soft
saffron rice, and suitable sauce have been sent to you by King Kikī of
Kāsi. Please accept them.'

'The king has many duties, and much to do. I have
enough.[1471](endnotes.xhtml_note-1471){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1471
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let this be for the king himself.'

Ānanda, you might think: 'Surely the brahmin student Jotipāla must have
been someone else at that
time?'[1472](endnotes.xhtml_note-1472){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1472
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But you should not see it like this. I
myself was the student Jotipāla at that time."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn82">

### [MN 82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Raṭṭhapāla ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Raṭṭhapālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1473](endnotes.xhtml_note-1473){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1473
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering in the land of the Kurus together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kurus named
Thullakoṭṭhika.[1474](endnotes.xhtml_note-1474){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1474
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika, together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own
insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known
to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good
in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to
see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika went up to the
Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged
greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms
toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept
silent. When they were seated, the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired
up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk.

Now at that time a gentleman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading
clan in Thullakoṭṭhika, was sitting in the assembly. He thought, "As I
understand the Buddha's teaching, it's not easy for someone living at
home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished
shell.[1475](endnotes.xhtml_note-1475){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1475
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I shave off my hair and beard,
dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?"

Then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, the brahmins
and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before
leaving.

Soon after they left, Raṭṭhapāla went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, as I understand the Buddha's
teaching, it's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. I wish to shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness. Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in
the Buddha's presence? May the Buddha please give me the going forth!"

"But, Raṭṭhapāla, do you have your parents'
permission?"[1476](endnotes.xhtml_note-1476){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1476
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir."

"Raṭṭhapāla, Buddhas don't give the going forth to the child of parents
who haven't given their permission."

"I'll make sure, sir, to get my parents' permission."

Then Raṭṭhapāla got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
the Buddha. Then he went to his parents and said, "Mum and dad, as I
understand the Buddha's teachings, it's not easy for someone living at
home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished
shell. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and
go forth from the lay life to homelessness. Please give me permission to
go forth."

When he said this, Raṭṭhapāla's parents said to him, "But, dear
Raṭṭhapāla, you're our only child. You're dear to us and we love you.
You're dainty and raised in comfort. You know nothing of suffering. Even
when you die we will lose you against our wishes. So how can we allow
you to go forth while you're still alive?"

For a second time, and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla asked his parents for
permission, but got the same reply.

Then Raṭṭhapāla thought, "My parents don't allow me to go forth." He
laid down right there on the bare ground,
saying,[1477](endnotes.xhtml_note-1477){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1477
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "I'll either die right here or go forth."
And he refused to eat, up to the seventh meal.

Then Raṭṭhapāla's parents said to him, "Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you're our only
child. You're dear to us and we love you. You're dainty and raised in
comfort. You know nothing of suffering. When you die we will lose you
against our wishes. So how can we allow you to go forth from lay life to
homelessness while you're still living? Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat, drink,
and amuse yourself. While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in making
merit. We don't allow you to go forth. When you die we will lose you
against our wishes. So how can we allow you to go forth while you're
still alive?"

When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

For a second time, and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla's parents made the same
request.

And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. Raṭṭhapāla's parents then
went to see his friends. They told them of the situation and asked for
their help.

Then Raṭṭhapāla's friends went to him and said, "Our friend Raṭṭhapāla,
you are your parents' only child. You're dear to them and they love you.
You're dainty and raised in comfort. You know nothing of suffering. When
you die your parents will lose you against their wishes. So how can they
allow you to go forth while you're still alive? Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat,
drink, and amuse yourself. While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in
making merit. Your parents will not allow you to go forth. Even when you
die your parents will lose you against their wishes. So how can they
allow you to go forth while you're still alive?"

When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

For a second time, and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla's friends made the same
request. And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

Then Raṭṭhapāla's friends went to his parents and said, "Mum and dad,
Raṭṭhapāla is lying there on the bare ground saying: 'I'll either die
right here or go forth.' If you don't allow him to go forth, he'll die
there. But if you do allow him to go forth, you'll see him again
afterwards. And if he doesn't enjoy the renunciate life, where else will
he have to go? He'll come right back here. Please give Raṭṭhapāla
permission to go forth."

"Then, dears, we give Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth. But once gone
forth he must visit his parents."

Then Raṭṭhapāla's friends went to him and said, "Get up, Raṭṭhapāla!
Your parents have given you permission to go forth from lay life to
homelessness. But once gone forth you must visit your parents."

Raṭṭhapāla got up and regained his strength. He went to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, I have my parents'
permission to go forth from the lay life to homelessness. May the Buddha
please give me the going forth."

And Raṭṭhapāla received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's
presence. Not long after Venerable Raṭṭhapāla's ordination, a fortnight
later, the Buddha---having stayed in Thullakoṭṭhika as long as he
pleased---set out for Sāvatthī. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at
Sāvatthī, where he stayed in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1478](endnotes.xhtml_note-1478){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1478
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Raṭṭhapāla became one of the perfected.

Then he went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, I would like to visit my parents, if the Buddha allows it."

Then the Buddha focused on comprehending Raṭṭhapāla's mind. When he knew
that it was impossible for Raṭṭhapāla to resign the training and return
to a lesser life, he said, "Please, Raṭṭhapāla, go at your convenience."

And then Raṭṭhapāla got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he set his lodgings
in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Thullakoṭṭhika.
Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika, where he stayed
in King Koravya's deer range. Then Raṭṭhapāla robed up in the morning
and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Thullakoṭṭhika for alms.
Wandering indiscriminately for almsfood, he approached his own father's
house.

Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla's father was having his hair dressed in the
hall of the middle
gate.[1479](endnotes.xhtml_note-1479){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1479
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw Raṭṭhapāla coming off in the
distance and said,

"Our dear and beloved only son was made to go forth by these shavelings,
these fake ascetics!" And at his own father's home Raṭṭhapāla received
neither alms nor a polite refusal, but only abuse.

Now at that time a family bondservant wanted to throw away the previous
night's porridge. So Raṭṭhapāla said to her, "If that's to be thrown
away, sister, pour it here in my bowl." As she was pouring the porridge
into his bowl, she recognized the features of his hands, feet, and
voice.[1480](endnotes.xhtml_note-1480){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1480
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

She then went to his mother and said, "Please, madam, you should know
this. Master Raṭṭhapāla has arrived."

"If you speak the truth, wench, I'll make you a free woman!"

Then Raṭṭhapāla's mother went to his father and said, "Please
householder, you should know this. It seems our son Raṭṭhapāla has
arrived."

Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla was eating last night's porridge by a wall.
Then Raṭṭhapāla's father went up to him and said, "Dear Raṭṭhapāla! How
can you be eating last night's
porridge?[1481](endnotes.xhtml_note-1481){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1481
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why not go to your own
home?"[1482](endnotes.xhtml_note-1482){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1482
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Householder, how could those of us who have gone forth from the lay
life to homelessness have a house? We are homeless, householder. I came
to your house, but there I received neither alms nor a polite refusal,
but only abuse."

"Come, dear Raṭṭhapāla, let's go to the house."

"Enough, householder. My meal is finished for today."

"Well then, dear Raṭṭhapāla, please accept tomorrow's meal from me."
Raṭṭhapāla consented with silence.

Then, knowing that Raṭṭhapāla had consented, his father went back to his
own house. He made a heap of gold, both coined and uncoined, and hid it
under mats. Then he addressed Raṭṭhapāla's former wives, "Please,
daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves in the way that our son Raṭṭhapāla
found you most adorable."

And when the night had passed Raṭṭhapāla's father had delicious fresh
and cooked foods prepared in his own home, and announced the time to the
Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, saying, "Sir, it's time. The meal is ready."

Then Raṭṭhapāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to his father's home, and sat down on the seat spread out.
Raṭṭhapāla's father, revealing the heap of gold, both coined and
uncoined, said to him, "Dear Raṭṭhapāla, this is your maternal fortune.
There's another paternal fortune, and an ancestral one. You can both
enjoy your wealth and make merit. Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy
wealth, and make merit!"

"If you'd follow my advice, householder, you'd have this heap of gold,
both coined and uncoined, loaded on a cart and carried away to be dumped
in the middle of the Ganges river. Why is that? Because this will bring
you nothing but sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress."

Then Raṭṭhapāla's former wives each clasped his feet and said, "What are
they like, master, the nymphs for whom you lead the spiritual life?"

"Sisters, I don't lead the spiritual life for the sake of
nymphs."[1483](endnotes.xhtml_note-1483){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1483
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Saying, "Our master Raṭṭhapāla addresses us as sisters!" they fainted
right away.

Then Raṭṭhapāla said to his father, "If there is food to be given,
householder, please give it. But don't harass me."

"Eat, dear Raṭṭhapāla. The meal is ready." Then Raṭṭhapāla's father
served and satisfied Venerable Raṭṭhapāla with his own hands with
delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When he had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, he recited this verse
while standing right there:

> "See this fancy
> puppet,[1484](endnotes.xhtml_note-1484){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1484
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> a body built of sores,\
> diseased, obsessed over,\
> in which nothing lasts at all.
>
> See this fancy figure,\
> with its gems and earrings;\
> it is bones encased in skin,\
> made pretty by its clothes.
>
> Rouged feet\
> and powdered face\
> may be enough to beguile a fool,\
> but not a seeker of the far shore.
>
> Hair in eight braids\
> and eyeshadow\
> may be enough to beguile a fool,\
> but not a seeker of the far shore.
>
> A rotting body all adorned\
> like a freshly painted makeup box\
> may be enough to beguile a fool,\
> but not a seeker of the far shore.
>
> The hunter laid his snare,\
> but the deer didn't spring the trap.\
> I've eaten the bait and now I go,\
> leaving the trapper to lament."

Then Raṭṭhapāla, having recited this verse while standing, went to King
Koravya's deer range and sat at the root of a tree for the day's
meditation.

Then King Koravya addressed his
gamekeeper,[1485](endnotes.xhtml_note-1485){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1485
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "My good gamekeeper, tidy up the park of
the deer range. We will go to see the scenery."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied the gamekeeper. While tidying the deer
range he saw Raṭṭhapāla sitting in meditation. Seeing this, he went to
the king, and said, "The deer range is tidy, sire. And the gentleman
named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in Thullakoṭṭhika, of whom
you have often spoken highly, is meditating there at the root of a
tree."

"Well then, my good gamekeeper, that's enough of the park for today. Now
I shall pay homage to Mister Raṭṭhapāla."

And then King Koravya said, "Give away the fresh and cooked foods that
have been prepared there." He had the finest carriages harnessed. Then
he mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out
in full royal pomp from Thullakoṭṭhika to see Raṭṭhapāla. He went by
carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached
Raṭṭhapāla on foot, together with a group of eminent officials. They
exchanged greetings, and, when the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side and said to Raṭṭhapāla:

"Here, Mister Raṭṭhapāla, sit on this elephant rug."

"Enough, great king, you sit on it. I'm sitting on my own seat."

So the king sat down on the seat spread out, and said:

"Mister Raṭṭhapāla, there are these four kinds of decay. Because of
these, some people shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes,
and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. What four? Decay due to
old age, decay due to sickness, decay of wealth, and decay of relatives.

And what is decay due to old age? It's when someone is old, elderly, and
senior, advanced in years, and has reached the final stage of life. They
reflect: 'I'm now old, elderly, and senior. I'm advanced in years and
have reached the final stage of life. It's not easy for me to acquire
more wealth or to increase the wealth I've already acquired. Why don't I
shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the
lay life to homelessness?' So because of that decay due to old age they
go forth. This is called decay due to old age. But Mister Raṭṭhapāla is
now a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the
prime of
life.[1486](endnotes.xhtml_note-1486){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1486
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You have no decay due to old age. So what
did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

And what is decay due to sickness? It's when someone is sick, suffering,
gravely ill. They reflect: 'I'm now sick, suffering, gravely ill. It's
not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I've
already acquired. Why don't I go forth from the lay life to
homelessness?' So because of that decay due to sickness they go forth.
This is called decay due to sickness. But Mister Raṭṭhapāla is now
rarely ill or unwell. Your stomach digests well, being neither too hot
nor too cold. You have no decay due to sickness. So what did you know or
see or hear that made you go forth?

And what is decay of wealth? It's when someone is rich, affluent, and
wealthy. But gradually their wealth dwindles away. They reflect: 'I used
to be rich, affluent, and wealthy. But gradually my wealth has dwindled
away. It's not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the
wealth I've already acquired. Why don't I go forth from the lay life to
homelessness?' So because of that decay of wealth they go forth. This is
called decay of wealth. But Mister Raṭṭhapāla is the son of the leading
clan here in Thullakoṭṭhika. You have no decay of wealth. So what did
you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

And what is decay of relatives? It's when someone has many friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin. But gradually their relatives dwindle
away. They reflect: 'I used to have many friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin. But gradually they've dwindled away. It's not easy
for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I've already
acquired. Why don't I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes,
and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?' So because of that
decay of relatives they go forth. This is called decay of relatives. But
Mister Raṭṭhapāla has many friends and colleagues, relatives and kin
right here in Thullakoṭṭhika. You have no decay of relatives. So what
did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

There are these four kinds of decay. Because of these, some people shave
off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the
lay life to homelessness. Mister Raṭṭhapāla has none of these. So what
did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?"

"Great king, the Blessed One who knows and sees, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha has taught these four summaries of the teaching
for recitation. It was after knowing and seeing and hearing these that I
went forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1487](endnotes.xhtml_note-1487){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1487
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What four?

'The world is unstable and swept away.' This is the first summary.

'The world has no shelter and no savior.' This is the second summary.

'The world has no owner---you must leave it all behind and pass on.'
This is the third summary.

'The world is wanting, insatiable, the slave of craving.' This is the
fourth summary.

The Blessed One who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha taught these four summaries of the teaching. It was
after knowing and seeing and hearing these that I went forth from the
lay life to homelessness."

"'The world is unstable and swept away.' So Mister Raṭṭhapāla said. How
should I see the meaning of this statement?"

"What do you think, great king? When you were twenty or twenty-five
years of age, were you proficient at riding elephants, horses, and
chariots, and at archery and swordsmanship? Were you strong in thigh and
arm, capable, and
battle-hardened?"[1488](endnotes.xhtml_note-1488){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1488
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I was, Mister Raṭṭhapāla. Sometimes it seems as if I had superpowers
then. I don't see anyone who could have equalled me in strength."

"What do you think, great king? These days are you just as strong in
thigh and arm, capable, and battle-hardened?"

"No, Mister Raṭṭhapāla. For now I am old, elderly, and senior, I'm
advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life. I am eighty
years old. Sometimes I intend to step in one place, but my foot goes
somewhere else."

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'The world is
unstable and swept away.'"

"It's incredible, Mister Raṭṭhapāla, it's amazing, how well said this
was by the Buddha. For the world is indeed unstable and swept away.

In this royal court you can find divisions of elephants, cavalry,
chariots, and infantry. They will serve to defend us from any threats.
Yet you said: 'The world has no shelter and no savior.' How should I see
the meaning of this statement?"

"What do you think, great king? Do you have any chronic ailments?"

"Yes, I do. Sometimes my friends and colleagues, relatives and kin
surround me, thinking: 'Now the king will die! Now the king will die!'"

"What do you think, great king? Can you get your friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin to help: 'Please, my dear friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin, all of you here share my pain so that I may feel less
pain.' Or must you alone feel that pain?"

"I can't get my friends to share my pain. Rather, I alone must feel it."

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'The world has
no shelter and no savior.'"

"It's incredible, Mister Raṭṭhapāla, it's amazing, how well said this
was by the Buddha. For the world indeed has no shelter and no savior.

In this royal court you can find abundant gold, both coined and
uncoined, stored in dungeons and towers. Yet you said: 'The world has no
owner---you must leave it all behind and pass on.' How should I see the
meaning of this statement?"

"What do you think, great king? These days you amuse yourself, supplied
and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. But is there
any way to ensure that in the next life you will continue to amuse
yourself in the same way, supplied and provided with the same five kinds
of sensual stimulation? Or will others make use of this property, while
you pass on according to your deeds?"

"There's no way to ensure that I will continue to amuse myself in the
same way. Rather, others will take over this property, while I pass on
according to my deeds."

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'The world has
no owner---you must leave it all behind and pass on.'"

"It's incredible, Mister Raṭṭhapāla, it's amazing, how well said this
was by the Buddha. For the world indeed has no owner---you must leave it
all behind and pass on.

You also said this: 'The world is wanting, insatiable, the slave of
craving.' How should I see the meaning of this statement?"

"What do you think, great king? Do you reign over the prosperous land of
Kuru?"

"Indeed I do."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and reliable man
were to come from the east. He'd approach you and say: 'Please great
king, you should know this. I come from the east. There I saw a large
country that is successful and prosperous, populous, full of people.
They have many divisions of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and infantry.
And there's plenty of money and grain, plenty of gold, coined and
uncoined, worked and unworked, and plenty of women for the taking. With
your current forces you can conquer it. Conquer it, great king!' What
would you do?"

"I would conquer it and reign over it."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and reliable man
were to come from the west, north, south, or from over the
ocean.[1489](endnotes.xhtml_note-1489){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1489
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He'd approach you and say the same thing.
What would you do?"

"I would conquer it and reign over it."

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'The world is
wanting, insatiable, the slave of
craving.'[1490](endnotes.xhtml_note-1490){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1490
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And it was after knowing and seeing and
hearing this that I went forth from the lay life to homelessness."

"It's incredible, Mister Raṭṭhapāla, it's amazing, how well said this
was by the Buddha. For the world is indeed wanting, insatiable, the
slave of craving."

This is what Venerable Raṭṭhapāla said. Then he went on to say:

> "I see rich people in the world who,\
> because of delusion, give not `<j>`{=html}the wealth they've earned.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> Greedily, they hoard their riches,\
> yearning for ever more sensual pleasures.
>
> A king who conquered the earth by force,\
> ruling the land from sea to sea,\
> unsatisfied with the near shore of the ocean,\
> would still yearn for the further shore.
>
> Not just the king, but others too,\
> reach death not rid of craving.\
> They leave the body still wanting,\
> for in this world sensual pleasures never satisfy.
>
> Relatives lament, their hair disheveled,\
> saying 'Ah! Alas! They're not immortal!'\
> They take out the body wrapped in a shroud,\
> heap up a pyre, and burn it there.
>
> It's poked with stakes while being burnt,\
> in just a single cloth, all wealth gone.\
> Relatives, friends, and companions\
> can't help you when you're dying.
>
> Heirs take your riches,\
> while beings fare on according to their deeds.\
> Riches don't follow you when you die;\
> nor do children, wife, wealth, nor kingdom.
>
> Longevity isn't gained by riches,\
> nor does wealth banish old age;\
> for the wise say this life is short,\
> it's perishable and not eternal.
>
> The rich and the poor feel its touch;\
> the fool and the wise feel it too.\
> But the fool lies stricken by their own folly,\
> while the wise don't tremble at the touch.
>
> Therefore wisdom's much better than wealth,\
> since by wisdom `<j>`{=html}you reach consummation in this life.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> But if because of delusion `<j>`{=html}you don't reach consummation,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> you'll do evil deeds in life after life.
>
> One who enters a womb and the world beyond,\
> will transmigrate from one life to the next.\
> While someone of little wisdom, `<j>`{=html}placing faith in them,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> also enters a womb and the world beyond.
>
> As a bandit caught in a window\
> is punished for his own bad deeds;\
> so after departing, in the world beyond,\
> people are punished for their own bad deeds.
>
> Sensual pleasures are diverse, sweet, delightful;\
> appearing in disguise they disturb the
> mind.[1491](endnotes.xhtml_note-1491){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1491
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Seeing danger in sensual stimulations,\
> I went forth, O King.
>
> As fruit falls from a tree, so people fall,\
> young and old, when the body breaks up.\
> Seeing this, too, I went forth, O King;\
> the ascetic life is unfailingly better."

</article>
<article id="mn83">

### [MN 83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About King Maghadeva ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Maghadevasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1492](endnotes.xhtml_note-1492){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1492
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Mithilā in the Maghadeva Mango
Grove.[1493](endnotes.xhtml_note-1493){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1493
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha smiled at a certain spot.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "What is the cause, what is the reason
why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

So Ānanda arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms
toward the Buddha, and said, "What is the cause, what is the reason why
the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

"Once upon a time, Ānanda, right here in Mithilā there was a just and
principled king named Maghadeva, a great king who stood by his
duty.[1494](endnotes.xhtml_note-1494){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1494
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He justly treated brahmins and
householders, and people of town and country. And he observed the
sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King Maghadeva addressed his
barber,[1495](endnotes.xhtml_note-1495){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1495
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'My dear barber, when you see grey hairs
growing on my head, please tell me.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the barber.

When many thousands of years had passed, the barber saw grey hairs
growing on the king's head. He said to the king, 'The messengers of the
gods have shown themselves to you. Grey hairs can be seen growing on
your
head.'[1496](endnotes.xhtml_note-1496){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1496
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Well then, my dear barber, carefully pull them out with tweezers and
place them in my cupped hands.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the barber, and he did as the king
said.[1497](endnotes.xhtml_note-1497){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1497
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The king gave the barber a prize village, then summoned the crown prince
and said, 'Dear prince, the messengers of the gods have shown themselves
to me. Grey hairs can be seen growing on my head. I have enjoyed human
pleasures. Now it is time to seek heavenly
pleasures.[1498](endnotes.xhtml_note-1498){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1498
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Come, dear prince, rule the
realm.[1499](endnotes.xhtml_note-1499){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1499
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall shave off my hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[1500](endnotes.xhtml_note-1500){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1500
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For dear prince, you too will one day see grey hairs growing on your
head. When this happens, after giving a prize village to the barber and
carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, you should shave off
your hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay
life to homelessness. Keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do
not be my final man. When a pair of men are living, the one who breaks
such good practice is their final man. Therefore I say to you, "Keep up
this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my final man."'

And so, after giving a prize village to the barber and carefully
instructing the crown prince in kingship, King Maghadeva shaved off his
hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life
to homelessness here in this mango grove. He meditated spreading a heart
full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and
to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, he spread a heart full of love to the whole world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. He meditated
spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a
heart full of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

For 84,000 years King Maghadeva played games as a child, for 84,000
years he acted as viceroy, for 84,000 years he ruled the realm, and for
84,000 years he led the spiritual life after going forth here in this
mango
grove.[1501](endnotes.xhtml_note-1501){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1501
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And having developed the four divine
meditations, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a
good place, a divine realm of
Brahmā.[1502](endnotes.xhtml_note-1502){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1502
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King Maghadeva's son addressed his barber, 'My dear barber, when
you see grey hairs growing on my head, please tell me.' And all unfolded
as in the case of his father. And having developed the four divine
meditations, when his body broke up, after death, Maghadeva's son was
reborn in a good place, a divine realm of Brahmā.

And a lineage of 84,000 kings, sons of sons of King Maghadeva, shaved
off their hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from
the lay life to homelessness here in this mango grove. They meditated
spreading a heart full of love ... compassion ... rejoicing ...
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. For
84,000 years they played games as a child, for 84,000 years they acted
as viceroy, for 84,000 years they ruled the realm, and for 84,000 years
they led the spiritual life after going forth here in this mango
grove.[1503](endnotes.xhtml_note-1503){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1503
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And having developed the four divine
meditations, when their bodies broke up, after death, they were reborn
in a good place, a divine realm of Brahmā.

Nimi was the last of those kings, a just and principled king, a great
king who stood by his
duty.[1504](endnotes.xhtml_note-1504){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1504
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He justly treated brahmins and
householders, and people of town and country. And he observed the
sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

Once upon a time, Ānanda, while the gods of the thirty-three were
sitting together in the Hall of Justice, this discussion came up among
them: 'The people of Videha are so fortunate, so very fortunate to have
Nimi as their king. He is a just and principled king, a great king who
stands by his duty. He justly treats brahmins and householders, and
people of town and country. And he observes the sabbath on the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.'

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three, 'Good
sirs, would you like to see King Nimi?'

'We would.'

Now at that time it was the fifteenth day sabbath, and King Nimi had
bathed his head and was sitting upstairs in the royal longhouse to
observe the sabbath. Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm, Sakka vanished from the thirty-three gods and
reappeared in front of King Nimi. He said to the king, 'You're
fortunate, great king, so very fortunate. The gods of the thirty-three
were sitting together in the Hall of Justice, where they were singing
your
praises.[1505](endnotes.xhtml_note-1505){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1505
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They would like to see you. I shall send a
chariot harnessed with a thousand thoroughbreds for you, great king.
Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without wavering!' King Nimi
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the king had consented, as easily as a strong person
would extend or contract their arm, Sakka vanished from King Nimi and
reappeared among the gods of the thirty-three.

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali, 'Come, dear
Mātali, harness the chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds. Then go to
King Nimi and say, "Great king, this chariot has been sent for you by
Sakka, lord of gods. Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without
wavering!"'

'Yes, lord,' replied Mātali. He did as Sakka asked, and said to the
king, 'Great king, this chariot has been sent for you by Sakka, lord of
gods. Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without wavering! But
which way should we go---the way of those who experience the result of
bad deeds, or the way of those who experience the result of good deeds?'

'Take me both ways,
Mātali.'[1506](endnotes.xhtml_note-1506){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1506
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mātali brought King Nimi to the Hall of Justice. Sakka saw King Nimi
coming off in the distance, and said to him: 'Come, great king! Welcome,
great king! The gods of the thirty-three who wanted to see you were
sitting together in the Hall of Justice, where they were singing your
praises. The gods of the thirty-three would like to see you. Enjoy
divine glory among the gods!'

'Enough, good sir. Send me back to Mithilā right away. That way I shall
justly treat brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.
And I shall observe the sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth
of the
fortnight.'[1507](endnotes.xhtml_note-1507){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1507
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali, 'Come, dear
Mātali, harness the chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds and send King
Nimi back to Mithilā right away.'

'Yes, lord,' replied Mātali, and did as Sakka asked. And there King Nimi
justly treated his people, and observed the sabbath.

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King Nimi addressed his barber, 'My dear barber, when you see
grey hairs growing on my head, please tell me.' And all unfolded as
before.

And having developed the four divine meditations, when his body broke
up, after death, King Nimi was reborn in a good place, a divine realm of
Brahmā.

But King Nimi had a son named
Kaḷārajanaka.[1508](endnotes.xhtml_note-1508){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1508
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He didn't go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. He broke that good practice. He was their final man.

Ānanda, you might think, 'Surely King Maghadeva, by whom that good
practice was founded, must have been someone else at that time?' But you
should not see it like this. I myself was King Maghadeva at that time. I
was the one who founded that good practice, which was kept up by those
who came after.

But that good practice doesn't lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads
as far as rebirth in the Brahmā
realm.[1509](endnotes.xhtml_note-1509){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1509
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But now I have founded a good practice that
does lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment.

And what is that good practice? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is the good practice I have now founded that leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

Ānanda, I say to you: 'You all should keep up this good practice that I
have founded. Do not be my final
men.'[1510](endnotes.xhtml_note-1510){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1510
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a pair of men are living, the one who
breaks such good practice is their final man. Ānanda, I say to you: 'You
all should keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my
final men.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn84">

### [MN 84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Madhurā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Madhurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1511](endnotes.xhtml_note-1511){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1511
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna
was staying near Madhurā, in Gunda's
Grove.[1512](endnotes.xhtml_note-1512){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1512
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

King Avantiputta of Madhurā
heard,[1513](endnotes.xhtml_note-1513){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1513
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "It seems the ascetic Kaccāna is staying
near Madhurā, in Gunda's Grove. He has this good reputation: 'He is
astute, competent, clever, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent,
mature, a perfected one.' It's good to see such perfected ones."

And then King Avantiputta had the finest carriages harnessed. He mounted
a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out in full
royal pomp from Madhurā to see Mahākaccāna. He went by carriage as far
as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached Mahākaccāna on
foot. They exchanged greetings, and when the greetings and polite
conversation were over, the king sat down to one side and said to
Mahākaccāna:

"Mister Kaccāna, the brahmins
say:[1514](endnotes.xhtml_note-1514){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1514
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Only brahmins are the best class; other
classes are inferior. Only brahmins are the light class; other classes
are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not others. Only brahmins are
Brahmā's true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by
Brahmā, heirs of
Brahmā.'[1515](endnotes.xhtml_note-1515){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1515
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What does Mister Kaccāna have to say about
this?"

"Great king, that's just something noised about in the world. And here's
a way to understand that it's just hearsay in the world.

What do you think, great king? Suppose an aristocrat prospers in money,
grain, silver, or gold. Wouldn't there be aristocrats, brahmins,
peasants, and menials who would get up before him and go to bed after
him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely?"

"There would, Mister Kaccāna."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a brahmin ... a peasant ... a
menial prospers in money, grain, silver, or gold. Wouldn't there be
menials, aristocrats, brahmins, and peasants who would get up before him
and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking
politely?"[1516](endnotes.xhtml_note-1516){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1516
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There would, Mister Kaccāna."

"What do you think, great king? If this is so, are the four classes
equal or not? Or how do you see this?"

"Certainly, Mister Kaccāna, in this case these four classes are equal. I
can't see any difference between them."

"And here's another way to understand that the claims of the brahmins
are just hearsay in the world.

What do you think, great king? Take an aristocrat who kills living
creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct; uses speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and is covetous, malicious, and
has wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, would they be
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"Such an aristocrat would be reborn in a bad place. That's what I think,
but I've also heard it from the perfected
ones."[1517](endnotes.xhtml_note-1517){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1517
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, good, great king! It's good that you think so, and it's good that
you've heard it from the perfected ones. What do you think, great king?
Take a brahmin ... a peasant ... a menial who kills living creatures,
steals, and commits sexual misconduct; uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and is covetous, malicious, and has
wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, would they be reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell, or not? Or how do
you see this?"

"Such a brahmin, peasant, or menial would be reborn in a bad place.
That's what I think, but I've also heard it from the perfected ones."

"Good, good, great king! It's good that you think so, and it's good that
you've heard it from the perfected ones. What do you think, great king?
If this is so, are the four classes equal or not? Or how do you see
this?"

"Certainly, Mister Kaccāna, in this case these four classes are equal. I
can't see any difference between them."

"And here's another way to understand that the claims of the brahmins
are just hearsay in the world.

What do you think, great king? Take an aristocrat who doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. When their body breaks up,
after death, would they be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, or
not? Or how do you see this?"

"Such an aristocrat would be reborn in a good place. That's what I
think, but I've also heard it from the perfected ones."

"Good, good, great king! It's good that you think so, and it's good that
you've heard it from the perfected ones. What do you think, great king?
Take a brahmin, peasant, or menial who doesn't kill living creatures,
steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted,
with right view. When their body breaks up, after death, would they be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, or not? Or how do you see
this?"

"Such a brahmin, peasant, or menial would be reborn in a good place.
That's what I think, but I've also heard it from the perfected ones."

"Good, good, great king! It's good that you think so, and it's good that
you've heard it from the perfected ones. What do you think, great king?
If this is so, are the four classes equal or not? Or how do you see
this?"

"Certainly, Mister Kaccāna, in this case these four classes are equal. I
can't see any difference between them."

"And here's another way to understand that the claims of the brahmins
are just hearsay in the world.

What do you think, great king? Take an aristocrat who breaks into
houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, commits highway
robbery, and commits adultery. Suppose your men arrest him and present
him to you, saying: 'Your Majesty, this man is a bandit, a criminal.
Punish him as you will.' What would you do to him?"

"I would have him executed, fined, or banished, or dealt with as befits
the crime. Why is that? Because he's lost his former status as an
aristocrat, and is just reckoned as a bandit."

"What do you think, great king? Take a brahmin, peasant, or menial who
breaks into houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings,
commits highway robbery, and commits adultery. Suppose your men arrest
him and present him to you, saying: 'Your Majesty, this man is a bandit,
a criminal. Punish him as you will.' What would you do to him?"

"I would have him executed, fined, or banished, or dealt with as befits
the crime. Why is that? Because he's lost his former status as a
brahmin, peasant, or menial, and is just reckoned as a bandit."

"What do you think, great king? If this is so, are the four classes
equal or not? Or how do you see this?"

"Certainly, Mister Kaccāna, in this case these four classes are equal. I
can't see any difference between them."

"And here's another way to understand that the claims of the brahmins
are just hearsay in the world.

What do you think, great king? Take an aristocrat who shaves off their
hair and beard, dresses in ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life
to homelessness. They refrain from killing living creatures, stealing,
and lying. They abstain from eating at night, eat in one part of the
day, and are celibate, ethical, and of good character. How would you
treat them?"

"I would bow to them, rise in their presence, or offer them a seat. I'd
invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And I'd organize their lawful guarding and
protection. Why is that? Because they've lost their former status as an
aristocrat, and are just reckoned as an ascetic."

"What do you think, great king? Take a brahmin, peasant, or menial who
shaves off their hair and beard, dresses in ocher robes, and goes forth
from the lay life to homelessness. They refrain from killing living
creatures, stealing, and lying. They abstain from eating at night, eat
in one part of the day, and are celibate, ethical, and of good
character. How would you treat them?"

"I would bow to them, rise in their presence, or offer them a seat. I'd
invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And I'd organize their lawful guarding and
protection. Why is that? Because they've lost their former status as a
brahmin, peasant, or menial, and are just reckoned as an ascetic."

"What do you think, great king? If this is so, are the four classes
equal or not? Or how do you see this?"

"Certainly, Mister Kaccāna, in this case these four classes are equal. I
can't see any difference between them."

"This is another way to understand that this is just hearsay in the
world: 'Only brahmins are the best class; other classes are
inferior.[1518](endnotes.xhtml_note-1518){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1518
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are the light class; other
classes are
dark.[1519](endnotes.xhtml_note-1519){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1519
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are purified, not
others.[1520](endnotes.xhtml_note-1520){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1520
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are Brahmā's true-born sons,
born from his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by Brahmā, heirs of
Brahmā.'"[1521](endnotes.xhtml_note-1521){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1521
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, King Avantiputta of Madhurā said to Mahākaccāna,
"Excellent, Mister Kaccāna! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Kaccāna has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Kaccāna, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Kaccāna remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"Great king, don't go for refuge to me. You should go for refuge to that
same Blessed One to whom I have gone for refuge."

"But where is that Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha?"

"Great king, the Buddha has already become fully quenched."

"Mister Kaccāna, if I heard that the Buddha was within ten leagues, or
twenty, or even up to a hundred leagues away, I'd go a hundred leagues
to see him. But since the Buddha has become fully quenched, I go for
refuge to that fully quenched Buddha, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Kaccāna remember me as
a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn85">

### [MN 85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Prince Bodhi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bodhirājakumārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood.

Now at that time a new stilt longhouse named Pink Lotus had recently
been constructed for Prince Bodhi. It had not yet been occupied by an
ascetic or brahmin or any person at
all.[1522](endnotes.xhtml_note-1522){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1522
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Prince Bodhi addressed the brahmin student Sañjikāputta, "Please,
dear Sañjikāputta, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head
to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and
living comfortably. And then ask him whether he might accept tomorrow's
meal from me together with the mendicant Saṅgha."

"Yes, sir," Sañjikāputta replied. He did as Prince Bodhi asked, and the
Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Sañjikāputta got up from
his seat, went to Prince Bodhi, and said, "I gave your message to Mister
Gotama, and he accepted."

And when the night had passed Prince Bodhi had delicious fresh and
cooked foods prepared in his own home. He also had the Pink Lotus
longhouse spread with white cloth down to the last step of the
staircase. Then he said to Sañjikāputta, "Please, dear Sañjikāputta, go
to the Buddha, and announce the time, saying, 'Sir, it's time. The meal
is ready.'"

"Yes, sir," Sañjikāputta replied, and he did as he was asked.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to Prince Bodhi's home.

Now at that time Prince Bodhi was standing outside the gates waiting for
the Buddha. Seeing the Buddha coming off in the distance, he went out to
greet him. After bowing and inviting the Buddha to go first, he
approached the Pink Lotus longhouse. But the Buddha stopped by the last
step of the staircase.

Then Prince Bodhi said to him, "Sir, let the Blessed One ascend on the
cloth! Let the Holy One ascend on the cloth! It will be for my lasting
welfare and happiness." But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent.

For a second time ... and a third time, Prince Bodhi said to him, "Sir,
let the Blessed One ascend on the cloth! Let the Holy One ascend on the
cloth! It will be for my lasting welfare and happiness."

Then the Buddha glanced at Venerable
Ānanda.[1523](endnotes.xhtml_note-1523){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1523
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So Ānanda said to Prince Bodhi, "Fold up
the cloth, Prince. The Buddha will not step upon white
cloth.[1524](endnotes.xhtml_note-1524){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1524
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Realized One has sympathy for future
generations."[1525](endnotes.xhtml_note-1525){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1525
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So Prince Bodhi had the cloth folded up and the seats spread out
upstairs in the longhouse. Then the Buddha ascended the longhouse and
sat on the seats spread out together with the Saṅgha of mendicants.

Then Prince Bodhi served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by
the Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked
foods.[1526](endnotes.xhtml_note-1526){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1526
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the Buddha had eaten and washed his
hand and bowl, Prince Bodhi took a low seat, sat to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, this is what I think: 'Pleasure is not gained through
pleasure; pleasure is gained through
pain.'"[1527](endnotes.xhtml_note-1527){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1527
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Prince, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I too thought: 'Pleasure is not gained through pleasure;
pleasure is gained through
pain.'[1528](endnotes.xhtml_note-1528){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1528
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Some time later, while still with pristine black hair, blessed with
youth, in the prime of life---though my mother and father wished
otherwise, weeping with tearful faces---I shaved off my hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Once I had gone forth I set out to discover what is
skillful, seeking the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Āḷāra
Kālāma and said to
him,[1529](endnotes.xhtml_note-1529){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1529
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend Kālāma, I wish to lead the
spiritual life in this teaching and training.'

Āḷāra Kālāma replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a
sensible person can soon realize their own tradition with their own
insight and live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others. Then it occurred to me,
'It is not solely by mere faith that Āḷāra Kālāma declares: "I realize
this teaching with my own insight, and live having achieved it." Surely
he meditates knowing and seeing this teaching.'

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, to what
extent do you say you've realized this teaching with your own insight?'
When I said this, he declared the dimension of nothingness.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Āḷāra Kālāma who has faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why
don't I make an effort to realize the same teaching that Āḷāra Kālāma
says he has realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that
teaching with my own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, is it up
to this point that you realized this teaching with your own insight, and
declare having achieved it?'

'I have, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
I've realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, I've realized with my own insight, and declare having
achieved it. So the teaching that I know, you know, and the teaching you
know, I know. I am like you and you are like me. Come now, reverend! We
should both lead this community together.' And that is how my tutor
Āḷāra Kālāma placed me, his student, on the same position as him, and
honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of nothingness.' Realizing
that this teaching was inadequate, I left disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,
'Reverend, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and
training.'

Uddaka replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a sensible
person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and
live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Rāma
declared: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having
achieved it." Surely he meditated knowing and seeing this teaching.'

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, to what
extent did Rāma say he'd realized this teaching with his own insight?'
When I said this, Uddaka son of Rāma declared the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Rāma who had faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why don't I
make an effort to realize the same teaching that Rāma said he had
realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that teaching with my
own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, had Rāma
realized this teaching with his own insight up to this point, and
declared having achieved it?'

'He had, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it,
you\'ve realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it.
The teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell
having achieved it, Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared
having achieved it. So the teaching that Rāma directly knew, you know,
and the teaching you know, Rāma directly knew. Rāma was like you and you
are like Rāma. Come now, reverend! You should lead this community.' And
that is how my spiritual companion Uddaka son of Rāma placed me in the
position of a tutor and honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left
disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. Traveling stage by stage in the Magadhan lands, I arrived
at Senānigama in Uruvelā. There I saw a delightful park, a lovely grove
with a flowing river that was clean and charming, with smooth banks. And
nearby was a village for alms.

Then it occurred to me, 'This park is truly delightful, a lovely grove
with a flowing river that's clean and charming, with smooth banks. And
nearby there's a village for alms. This is good enough for striving for
a gentleman wanting to strive.' So I sat down right there, thinking,
'This is good enough for striving.'

And then these three similes, which were neither supernaturally
inspired, nor learned before in the past, occurred to me.

Suppose there was a green, sappy log, and it was lying in water. Then a
person comes along with a drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and
produce heat. What do you think, Prince? By drilling the stick against
that green, sappy log lying in water, could they light a fire and
produce heat?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because it's a green, sappy log, and it's lying
in the water. That person will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't live
withdrawn in body and mind from sensual pleasures. They haven't
internally given up or stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst,
and passion for sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they
suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings because of their efforts,
they are incapable of knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This
was the first example that occurred to me.

Then a second example occurred to me.

Suppose there was a green, sappy log, and it was lying on dry land far
from the water. Then a person comes along with a drill-stick, thinking
to light a fire and produce heat. What do you think, Prince? By drilling
the stick against that green, sappy log on dry land far from water,
could they light a fire and produce heat?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because it's still a green, sappy log, despite
the fact that it's lying on dry land far from water. That person will
eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in
body and mind from sensual pleasures. But they haven't internally given
up or stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for
sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings because of their efforts, they are
incapable of knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was the
second example that occurred to me.

Then a third example occurred to me.

Suppose there was a dried up, withered log, and it was lying on dry land
far from the water. Then a person comes along with a drill-stick,
thinking to light a fire and produce heat. What do you think, Prince? By
drilling the stick against that dried up, withered log on dry land far
from water, could they light a fire and produce heat?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because it's a dried up, withered log, and it's
lying on dry land far from water."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in
body and mind from sensual pleasures. And they have internally given up
and stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for
sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings because of their efforts, they are capable
of knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was the third
example that occurred to me. These are the three similes, which were
neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past, that
occurred to me.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I, with teeth clenched and tongue
pressed against the roof of my mouth, squeeze, squash, and scorch mind
with mind?' So that's what I did, until sweat ran from my armpits. It
was like when a strong man grabs a weaker man by the head or throat or
shoulder and squeezes, squashes, and crushes them. In the same way, with
teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I
squeezed, squashed, and crushed mind with mind until sweat ran from my
armpits. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my mindfulness was
established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not tranquil, because
I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then winds came out my ears making a loud noise, like the puffing of a
blacksmith's bellows. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then strong winds ground my head, like a strong man was
drilling into my head with a sharp point. My energy was roused up and
unflagging, and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body
was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that
painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then I got a severe headache, like a strong man was tightening
a tough leather strap around my head. My energy was roused up and
unflagging, and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body
was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that
painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then strong winds carved up my belly, like a deft butcher or
their apprentice was slicing my belly open with a sharp meat cleaver. My
energy was roused up and unflagging, and my mindfulness was established
and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed
too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose and
ears. But then there was an intense burning in my body, like two strong
men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of
glowing coals. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then some deities saw me and said, 'The ascetic Gotama is dead.' Others
said, 'He's not dead, but he's dying.' Others said, 'He's not dead or
dying. The ascetic Gotama is a perfected one, for that is how the
perfected ones live.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice completely cutting off
food?' But deities came to me and said, 'Good sir, don't practice
totally cutting off food. If you do, we'll infuse heavenly nectar into
your pores and you will live on that.' Then it occurred to me, 'If I
claim to be completely fasting while these deities are infusing heavenly
nectar in my pores, that would be a lie on my part.' So I dismissed
those deities, saying, 'There's no need.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I just take a little bit of food each
time, a cup of broth made from mung beans, horse gram, chickpeas, or
green gram?' So that's what I did, until my body became extremely
emaciated. Due to eating so little, my major and minor limbs became like
the joints of an eighty-year-old or a dying man, my bottom became like a
camel's hoof, my vertebrae stuck out like beads on a string, and my ribs
were as gaunt as the broken-down rafters on an old barn. Due to eating
so little, the gleam of my eyes sank deep in their sockets, like the
gleam of water sunk deep down a well. Due to eating so little, my scalp
shriveled and withered like a green bitter-gourd in the wind and sun.
Due to eating so little, the skin of my belly stuck to my backbone, so
that when I tried to rub the skin of my belly I grabbed my backbone, and
when I tried to rub my backbone I rubbed the skin of my belly. Due to
eating so little, when I tried to urinate or defecate I fell face down
right there. Due to eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by
rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

Then some people saw me and said, 'The ascetic Gotama is black.' Some
said, 'He's not black, he's brown.' Some said, 'He's neither black nor
brown. The ascetic Gotama has tawny skin.' That's how far the pure,
bright complexion of my skin had been ruined by taking so little food.

Then it occurred to me, 'Whatever ascetics and brahmins have experienced
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion---whether in
the past, future, or present---this is as far as it goes, no-one has
done more than this. But I have not achieved any superhuman distinction
in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones by this severe,
gruelling work. Could there be another path to awakening?'

Then it occurred to me, 'I recall sitting in the cool shade of a black
plum tree while my father the Sakyan was off working. Quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered
and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss
born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.
Could that be the path to awakening?' Stemming from that memory came the
realization: '*That* is the path to awakening!'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why am I afraid of that pleasure, for it has
nothing to do with sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities?' Then it
occurred to me, 'I'm not afraid of that pleasure, for it has nothing to
do with sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities.'

Then it occurred to me, 'I can't achieve that pleasure with a body so
excessively emaciated. Why don't I eat some solid food, some rice and
porridge?' So I ate some solid food. Now at that time the group of five
mendicants were attending on me, thinking, 'The ascetic Gotama will tell
us of any truth that he realizes.' But when I ate some solid food, they
left disappointed in me, saying, 'The ascetic Gotama has become
indulgent; he has strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence.'

After eating solid food and gathering my strength, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and
remained in the first absorption ... second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. When my mind had immersed in samādhi
like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection
of past lives. I recollected many past lives. That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. And so I recollected my many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in
the first watch of the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge
arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for a
meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. I truly
understood: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it was freed, I
knew it was freed.

I understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.'

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

Then it occurred to me, 'This principle I have discovered is deep, hard
to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of
logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute. But people like clinging,
they love it and enjoy it. It's hard for them to see this topic; that
is, specific conditionality, dependent origination. It's also hard for
them to see this topic; that is, the stilling of all activities, the
letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away,
cessation, extinguishment. And if I were to teach the Dhamma, others
might not understand me, which would be wearying and troublesome for
me.' And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired,
nor learned before in the past, occurred to me:

> 'I've struggled hard to realize this,\
> enough with trying to explain it!\
> Those mired in greed and hate\
> can't really understand this teaching.
>
> It goes against the stream, subtle,\
> deep, obscure, and very fine.\
> Those besotted by greed cannot see,\
> for they're shrouded in a mass of darkness.'

And as I reflected like this, my mind inclined to remaining passive, not
to teaching the Dhamma.

Then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, thought, 'Alas! The
world will be lost, the world will perish! For the mind of the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, inclines to remaining
passive, not to teaching the Dhamma.'

Then Brahmā Sahampati, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm, vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared in
front of me. He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined
palms toward me, and said, 'Sir, let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!
Let the Holy One teach the Dhamma! There are beings with little dust in
their eyes. They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching.
There will be those who understand the teaching!'

That's what Brahmā Sahampati said. Then he went on to say:

> 'Among the Magadhans there appeared in the past\
> an impure teaching thought up by those still stained.\
> Fling open the door to freedom from death!\
> Let them hear the teaching `<j>`{=html}the immaculate one discovered.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Standing high on a rocky mountain,\
> you can see the people all around.\
> In just the same way, All-seer, so intelligent,\
> having ascended the Temple of Truth,
>
> rid of sorrow, look upon the people\
> swamped with sorrow, `<j>`{=html}oppressed by rebirth and old age.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> Rise, hero! Victor in battle, leader of the caravan,\
> wander the world free of debt.\
> Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!\
> There will be those who understand!'

Then, understanding Brahmā's invitation, I surveyed the world with the
eye of a Buddha, because of my compassion for sentient beings. And I saw
sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust
in their eyes; with keen faculties and with weak faculties, with good
qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And
some of them lived seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next
world, while others did not. It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or
pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without
rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in
the water reaching the water's surface. And some of them sprout and grow
in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water
clinging to them. Then I replied in verse to Brahmā Sahampati:

> 'Flung open are the doors to freedom from death!\
> Let those with ears to hear commit to faith.\
> Thinking it would be troublesome, Brahmā, `<j>`{=html}I did not teach
> `</j>`{=html}\
> the sophisticated, sublime Dhamma among humans.'

Then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing that his request for me to teach the
Dhamma had been granted, bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me
on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then it occurred to me, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will
quickly understand the teaching?' Then it occurred to me, 'That Āḷāra
Kālāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust in his
eyes. Why don't I teach him first of all? He'll quickly understand the
teaching.' But a deity came to me and said, 'Sir, Āḷāra Kālāma passed
away seven days ago.'

And knowledge and vision arose in me, 'Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven
days ago.' Then it occurred to me, 'This is a great loss for Āḷāra
Kālāma. If he had heard the teaching, he would have understood it
quickly.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will
quickly understand the teaching?' Then it occurred to me, 'That Uddaka
son of Rāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust
in his eyes. Why don't I teach him first of all? He'll quickly
understand the teaching.' But a deity came to me and said, 'Sir, Uddaka
son of Rāma, passed away just last night.'

And knowledge and vision arose in me, 'Uddaka son of Rāma, passed away
just last night.' Then it occurred to me, 'This is a great loss for
Uddaka. If he had heard the teaching, he would have understood it
quickly.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will
quickly understand the teaching?' Then it occurred to me, 'The group of
five mendicants were very helpful to me. They looked after me during my
time of resolute striving. Why don't I teach them first of all?' Then it
occurred to me, 'Where are the group of five mendicants staying these
days?' With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman I saw that the
group of five mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana.

So, when I had stayed in Uruvelā as long as I pleased, I set out for
Varanasi.

While I was traveling along the road between Gayā and Bodhgaya, the
Ājīvaka ascetic Upaka saw me and said, 'Reverend, your faculties are so
very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. In whose name have
you gone forth, reverend? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you
believe in?'

I replied to Upaka in verse:

> 'I am the champion, the knower of all,\
> unsullied in the midst of all things.\
> I've given up all, freed in the ending of craving.\
> Since I know for myself, whose follower should I be?
>
> I have no tutor.\
> There is no-one like me.\
> In the world with its gods,\
> I have no rival.
>
> For in this world, I am the perfected one;\
> I am the supreme Teacher.\
> I alone am fully awakened,\
> cooled, quenched.
>
> I am going to the city of Kāsi\
> to roll forth the Wheel of Dhamma.\
> In this world that is so blind,\
> I'll beat the drum of freedom from death!'

'According to what you claim, reverend, you ought to be the Infinite
Victor.'

> 'The victors are those who, like me,\
> have reached the ending of defilements.\
> I have conquered bad qualities, Upaka---\
> that's why I'm a victor.'

When I had spoken, Upaka said: 'If you say so, reverend.' Shaking his
head, he took a wrong turn and left.

Traveling stage by stage, I arrived at Varanasi, and went to see the
group of five mendicants in the deer park at Isipatana. The group of
five mendicants saw me coming off in the distance and stopped each
other, saying, 'Here comes the ascetic Gotama. He's so indulgent; he
strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence. We shouldn't bow
to him or rise for him or receive his bowl and robe. But we can set out
a seat; he can sit if he likes.'

Yet as I drew closer, the group of five mendicants were unable to stop
themselves as they had agreed. Some came out to greet me and receive my
bowl and robe, some spread out a seat, while others set out water for
washing my feet. But they still addressed me by name and as 'reverend'.

So I said to them, 'Mendicants, don't address me by name and as
"reverend". The Realized One is Perfected, a fully awakened Buddha.
Listen up, mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall
instruct you, I will teach you the Dhamma. By practicing as instructed
you will soon realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very
life. You will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

But they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama, even by that conduct, that
practice, that grueling work you did not achieve any superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. How could
you have achieved such a state now that you've become indulgent, strayed
from the struggle and fallen into indulgence?'

So I said to them, 'The Realized One has not become indulgent, strayed
from the struggle and fallen into indulgence. The Realized One is
Perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. Listen up, mendicants: I have
achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I will teach you the
Dhamma. By practicing as instructed you will soon realize the supreme
end of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live having
achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

But for a second time they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama ... you've
fallen into indulgence.'

So for a second time I said to them, 'The Realized One has not become
indulgent ...'

But for a third time they said to me, 'Reverend Gotama ... you've fallen
into indulgence.'

So I said to them, 'Mendicants, have you ever known me to speak like
this before?'

'No, sir.'

'The Realized One is Perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. Listen up,
mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I
will teach you the Dhamma. By practicing as instructed you will soon
realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. You
will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

I was able to persuade the group of five mendicants. Then sometimes I
advised two mendicants, while the other three went for alms. Then those
three would feed all six of us with what they brought back. Sometimes I
advised three mendicants, while the other two went for alms. Then those
two would feed all six of us with what they brought back.

As the group of five mendicants were being advised and instructed by me
like this, they soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in
this very life. They lived having achieved with their own insight the
goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness."

When he had spoken, Prince Bodhi said to the Buddha, "Sir, when a
mendicant has the Realized One as trainer, how long would it take for
them to realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very
life?"

"Well then, prince, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, prince? Are you skilled in the
art of wielding a hooked goad while riding an
elephant?"[1530](endnotes.xhtml_note-1530){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1530
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, prince? Suppose a man were to come along thinking,
'Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a hooked goad while riding an
elephant. I'll train in that art under him.' If he's faithless, he
wouldn't achieve what he could with faith. If he's unhealthy, he
wouldn't achieve what he could with good health. If he's devious or
deceitful, he wouldn't achieve what he could with honesty and integrity.
If he's lazy, he wouldn't achieve what he could with energy. If he's
stupid, he wouldn't achieve what he could with wisdom. What do you
think, prince? Could that man still train under you in the art of
wielding a hooked goad while riding an elephant?"

"Sir, if he had even a single one of these factors he couldn't train
under me, let alone all five."

"What do you think, prince? Suppose a man were to come along thinking,
'Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a hooked goad while riding an
elephant. I'll train in that art under him.' If he's faithful, he'd
achieve what he could with faith. If he's healthy, he'd achieve what he
could with good health. If he's honest and has integrity, he'd achieve
what he could with honesty and integrity. If he's energetic, he'd
achieve what he could with energy. If he's wise, he'd achieve what he
could with wisdom. What do you think, prince? Could that man still train
under you in the art of wielding a hooked goad while riding an
elephant?"

"Sir, if he had even a single one of these factors he could train under
me, let alone all five."

"In the same way, prince, there are these five factors that support
meditation.[1531](endnotes.xhtml_note-1531){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1531
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five? It's when a noble disciple has
faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely ill or unwell.
Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or deceitful. They
reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual
companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful
qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly
vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful
qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing
away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of
suffering. These are the five factors that support meditation.

When a mendicant with these five factors that support meditation has the
Realized One as trainer, they could realize the supreme end of the
spiritual path in seven years. Let alone seven years, they could realize
the supreme end of the spiritual path in six years, or as little as one
year. Let alone one year, when a mendicant with these five factors that
support meditation has the Realized One as trainer, they could realize
the supreme end of the spiritual path in seven months, or as little as
one day. Let alone one day, when a mendicant with these five factors
that support meditation has the Realized One as trainer, they could be
instructed In the evening and achieve distinction in the morning, or be
instructed in the morning and achieve distinction in the evening."

When he had spoken, Prince Bodhi said to the Buddha, "Oh, the Buddha!
Oh, the teaching! Oh, how well explained is the teaching! For someone
could be instructed in the evening and achieve distinction in the
morning, or be instructed in the morning and achieve distinction in the
evening."

When he said this, Sañjikāputta said to Prince Bodhi, "Though Mister
Bodhi speaks like this, you don't go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha."

"Don't say that, dear Sañjikāputta, don't say that! I have heard and
learned this in the presence of my lady
mother.[1532](endnotes.xhtml_note-1532){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1532
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Then my pregnant lady mother went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, 'Sir, the
prince or princess in my womb goes for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember them as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.'

Another time the Buddha was staying here in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. Then my nursemaid,
carrying me on her hip, went to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, 'Sir, this Prince Bodhi goes for refuge to the Buddha,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may
the Buddha remember him as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life.'

Now for a third time I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and
to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn86">

### [MN 86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Aṅgulimāla ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṅgulimālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time in the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala there was a
bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He was violent, bloody-handed, a hardened
killer, merciless to living
beings.[1533](endnotes.xhtml_note-1533){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1533
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He laid waste to villages, towns, and
countries. He was constantly murdering people, and he wore their fingers
as a
necklace.[1534](endnotes.xhtml_note-1534){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1534
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe,
he walked down the road that led to Aṅgulimāla.

The cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and travelers saw him on the road, and
said to him, "Don't take this road, ascetic. On this road there is a
bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened
killer, merciless to living beings. He has laid waste to villages,
towns, and countries. He is constantly murdering people, and he wears
their fingers as a necklace. People travel along this road only after
banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or
fifty. Still they meet their end by Aṅgulimāla's
hand."[1535](endnotes.xhtml_note-1535){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1535
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when they said this, the Buddha went on
in silence.

For a second time ... and a third time, they urged the Buddha to turn
back.

But when they said this, the Buddha went on in silence.

The bandit Aṅgulimāla saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, and
thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! People travel along this road
only after banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty,
forty, or fifty. Still they meet their end by my hand. But still this
ascetic comes along alone and unaccompanied, like a
conqueror.[1536](endnotes.xhtml_note-1536){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1536
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I take his life?"

Then Aṅgulimāla donned his sword and shield, fastened his bow and
arrows, and followed behind the Buddha. But the Buddha used his psychic
power to will that Aṅgulimāla could not catch up with him no matter how
hard he tried, even though the Buddha kept walking at a normal speed.

Then Aṅgulimāla thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! Previously,
even when I've chased a speeding elephant, horse, chariot or deer, I've
always caught up with them. But I can't catch up with this ascetic no
matter how hard I try, even though he's walking at a normal
speed."[1537](endnotes.xhtml_note-1537){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1537
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He stood still and said, "Stop, stop, ascetic!"

"I've stopped, Aṅgulimāla---now you stop."

Then Aṅgulimāla thought, "These Sakyan ascetics speak the truth. Yet
while walking the ascetic Gotama says: 'I've stopped, Aṅgulimāla---now
you stop.' Why don't I ask him about this?"

Then he addressed the Buddha in verse:

> "While walking, ascetic, you say 'I've
> stopped.'[1538](endnotes.xhtml_note-1538){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1538
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> And I have stopped, but you tell me I've not.\
> I'm asking you this, ascetic:\
> how is it you've stopped and I have not?"
>
> "Aṅgulimāla, I have forever stopped---\
> I've laid aside violence towards all
> creatures.[1539](endnotes.xhtml_note-1539){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1539
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> But you can't stop yourself `<j>`{=html}from harming living creatures;
> `</j>`{=html}\
> that's why I've stopped, but you have not."
>
> "Oh, at long last a renowned great seer,\
> an ascetic has followed me into this deep
> wood.[1540](endnotes.xhtml_note-1540){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1540
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Now that I've heard your verse on Dhamma,\
> I shall live without evil."
>
> With these words, `<j>`{=html}the bandit hurled his sword and weapons
> `</j>`{=html}\
> down a cliff into an abyss.\
> He venerated the Holy One's feet,\
> and asked him for the going forth right away.
>
> Then the Buddha, the compassionate great seer,\
> the teacher of the world with its gods,\
> said to him, "Come, monk!"\
> And with that he became a monk.

Then the Buddha set out for Sāvatthī with Venerable Aṅgulimāla as his
second monk. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī, where he
stayed in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time a crowd had gathered by the gate of King Pasenadi's
royal compound making a dreadful racket, "In your realm, Your Majesty,
there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a
hardened killer, merciless to living beings. He has laid waste to
villages, towns, and countries. He is constantly murdering people, and
he wears their fingers as a necklace. Your Majesty must put a stop to
him!"

Then King Pasenadi drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the day with
around five hundred horses, heading for the monastery. He went by
carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached
the Buddha on foot. He bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha said
to him,

"What is it, great king? Is King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha angry with
you, or the Licchavis of Vesālī, or some other opposing ruler?"

"No, sir. In my realm there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. ... I
shall put a stop to
him."[1541](endnotes.xhtml_note-1541){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1541
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But great king, suppose you were to see that Aṅgulimāla had shaved off
his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the lay
life to homelessness. And that he was refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and lying; that he was eating in one part of the
day, and was celibate, ethical, and of good character. What would you do
to him?"

"I would bow to him, rise in his presence, or offer him a seat. I'd
invite him to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And I'd organize his lawful guarding and
protection.[1542](endnotes.xhtml_note-1542){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1542
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But sir, how could such an immoral, evil
man ever have such virtue and restraint?"

Now at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla was sitting not far from the
Buddha. Then the Buddha pointed with his right arm and said to the king,
"Great king, this is Aṅgulimāla."

Then the king became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end.
Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Do not fear, great king. You have
nothing to fear from
him."[1543](endnotes.xhtml_note-1543){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1543
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the king's fear died down.

Then the king went over to Aṅgulimāla and said, "Sir, is the master
really Aṅgulimāla?"

"Yes, great king."

"What clans were your father and mother from?"

"My father was a Gagga, and my mother a
Mantāṇī."[1544](endnotes.xhtml_note-1544){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1544
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, may Master Gagga son of Mantāṇī be happy. I'll make sure that
you're provided with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick."

But at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla lived in the wilderness, ate only
almsfood, and owned just three robes. So he said to the king, "Enough,
great king. My robes are complete."

Then the king went back to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How the Buddha tames
those who are wild, pacifies those who are violent, and extinguishes
those who are unquenched! For I was not able to tame him with the rod
and the sword, but the Buddha tamed him without rod or
sword.[1545](endnotes.xhtml_note-1545){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1545
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many
duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience." Then King Pasenadi got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then as he was wandering
indiscriminately for almsfood he saw a woman undergoing a distressing
obstructed
labor.[1546](endnotes.xhtml_note-1546){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1546
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing this, it occurred to him, "Oh,
beings undergo such
travail\![1547](endnotes.xhtml_note-1547){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1547
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Oh, beings undergo such travail!"

Then after wandering for alms in Sāvatthī, after the meal, on his return
from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what had happened. The Buddha said to him, "Well then,
Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this:

'Ever since I was born, sister, I don't recall having intentionally
taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and
your baby be
safe.'"[1548](endnotes.xhtml_note-1548){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1548
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, wouldn't that be telling a deliberate lie? For I have
intentionally killed many living creatures."

"In that case, Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this:

'Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don't recall having
intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may
both you and your baby be
safe.'"[1549](endnotes.xhtml_note-1549){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1549
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," replied Aṅgulimāla. He went to that woman and said:

"Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don't recall having
intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may
both you and your baby be safe."

Then that woman was safe, and so was her baby.

Then Aṅgulimāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute,
soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life.
He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which
gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Aṅgulimāla became one of the perfected.

Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Now at that time someone threw a
stone that hit Aṅgulimāla, someone else threw a stick, and someone else
threw gravel. Then Aṅgulimāla---with cracked head, bleeding, his bowl
broken, and his outer robe torn---went to the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, and said to him, "Endure
it, brahmin! Endure it, brahmin! You're experiencing in this life the
result of deeds that might have caused you to be tormented in hell for
many years, many hundreds or thousands of
years."[1550](endnotes.xhtml_note-1550){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1550
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Later, Venerable Aṅgulimāla was experiencing the bliss of release while
in private retreat. On that occasion he expressed this heartfelt
sentiment:

> "He who once was heedless,\
> but turned to heedfulness,\
> lights up the world,\
> like the moon freed from clouds.
>
> Someone whose bad deed\
> is supplanted by the good,\
> lights up the world,\
> like the moon freed from clouds.
>
> A young mendicant\
> devoted to the Buddha's teaching,\
> lights up the world,\
> like the moon freed from clouds.
>
> May even my enemies `<j>`{=html}hear a Dhamma talk! `</j>`{=html}\
> May even my enemies `<j>`{=html}devote themselves to the Buddha's
> teaching! `</j>`{=html}\
> May even my enemies `<j>`{=html}associate with those good people
> `</j>`{=html}\
> who establish others in the Dhamma!
>
> May even my enemies `<j>`{=html}hear Dhamma at the right time,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> from those who teach acceptance,\
> praising acquiescence;\
> and may they follow that path!
>
> For then they'd never wish harm\
> upon myself or others.\
> Having arrived at ultimate
> peace,[1551](endnotes.xhtml_note-1551){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1551
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> they'd look after creatures firm and
> frail.[1552](endnotes.xhtml_note-1552){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1552
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> For irrigators guide the water,\
> and fletchers straighten arrows;\
> carpenters carve timber---\
> but the astute tame themselves.
>
> Some tame by using the rod,\
> some with goads, and some with whips.\
> But the unaffected one tamed me\
> without rod or sword.
>
> My name is
> 'Harmless',[1553](endnotes.xhtml_note-1553){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1553
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> though I used to be harmful.\
> The name I bear today is true,\
> for I do no harm to anyone.
>
> I used to be a bandit,\
> the notorious Aṅgulimāla.\
> Swept away in a great flood,\
> I went to the Buddha as a refuge.
>
> I used to have blood on my hands,\
> the notorious Aṅgulimāla.\
> See the refuge I've found---\
> the conduit to rebirth is eradicated.
>
> I've done many of the sort of deeds\
> that lead to a bad destination.\
> The result of my deeds has already struck me,\
> so I enjoy my food free of debt.
>
> Fools and half-wits\
> devote themselves to negligence.\
> But the wise protect diligence\
> as their best treasure.
>
> Don't devote yourself to negligence,\
> or delight in sexual intimacy.\
> For if you're diligent and practice absorption,\
> you'll attain abundant happiness.
>
> It was welcome, not unwelcome,\
> the advice I got was good.\
> Of the well-explained teachings,\
> I arrived at the best.
>
> It was welcome, not unwelcome,\
> the advice I got was good.\
> I've attained the three knowledges\
> and fulfilled the Buddha's instructions."

</article>
<article id="mn87">

### [MN 87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Born From the Beloved ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Piyajātikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1554](endnotes.xhtml_note-1554){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1554
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time a certain householder's dear and beloved only child
passed away. After their death he didn't feel like working or
eating.[1555](endnotes.xhtml_note-1555){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1555
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He would go to the cremation ground and
wail, "Where are you, my only child? Where are you, my only child?"

Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha
said to him, "Your faculties, householder, are those of one who is
unstable in their own mind; there is a deterioration in your faculties."

"And how, sir, could there be no deterioration of my faculties? For my
dear and beloved only child has passed away. Since their death I haven't
felt like working or eating. I go to the cremation ground and wail:
'Where are you, my only child? Where are you, my only child?'"

"That's so true, householder! That's so true, householder! For our loved
ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress."

"Sir, who on earth could ever think such a thing! For our loved ones are
a source of joy and happiness." Disagreeing with the Buddha's statement,
rejecting it, he got up from his seat and left.

Now at that time several gamblers were playing dice not far from the
Buddha. That householder approached them and told them what had
happened.

"That's so true, householder! That's so true, householder! For our loved
ones are a source of joy and happiness."

Thinking, "The gamblers and I are in agreement," the householder left.

Eventually that topic of discussion reached the royal
compound.[1556](endnotes.xhtml_note-1556){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1556
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then King Pasenadi addressed Queen
Mallikā,[1557](endnotes.xhtml_note-1557){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1557
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Mallika, your ascetic Gotama said this:
'Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress.'"

"If that's what the Buddha said, great king, then that's how it is."

"No matter what the ascetic Gotama says, Mallikā agrees with him: 'If
that's what the Buddha said, great king, then that's how it is.' You're
just like a student who agrees with everything their tutor says. Go
away, Mallikā, get out of here!"

Then Queen Mallikā addressed the brahmin Nāḷijaṅgha, "Please, brahmin,
go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him
if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And
then say: 'Sir, did the Buddha make this statement: "Our loved ones are
a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress"?' Remember
well how the Buddha answers and tell it to me. For Realized Ones say
nothing that is not so."

"Yes, ma'am," he replied. He went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, Queen Mallikā
bows with her head to your feet. She asks if you are healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And she asks whether the Buddha
made this statement: 'Our loved ones are a source of sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.'"

"That's right, brahmin, that's right! For our loved ones are a source of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

And here's a way to understand how our loved ones are a source of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. Once upon a time right
here in Sāvatthī a certain woman's mother passed away. And because of
that she went mad and lost her mind. She went from street to street and
from square to square saying, 'Has anyone seen my mother? Has anyone
seen my mother?'

And here's another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain woman's father ...
brother ... sister ... son ... daughter ... husband passed away. And
because of that she went mad and lost her mind. She went from street to
street and from square to square saying, 'Has anyone seen my husband?
Has anyone seen my husband?'

And here's another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain man's mother ...
father ... brother ... sister ... son ... daughter ... wife passed away.
And because of that he went mad and lost his mind. He went from street
to street and from square to square saying, 'Has anyone seen my wife?
Has anyone seen my wife?'

And here's another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain woman went to live
with her relative's family. But her relatives wanted to divorce her from
her husband and give her to another, who she didn't want. So she told
her husband about this. But he cut her in two and disemboweled himself,
thinking, 'We shall be together after death.' That's another way to
understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress."

Then Nāḷijaṅgha the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said, got up from his seat, went to Queen Mallikā, and told her
of all they had discussed. Then Queen Mallikā approached King Pasenadi
and said to him, "What do you think, great king? Do you love Princess
Vajirī?"

"Indeed I do, Mallikā."

"What do you think, great king? If she were to decay and perish, would
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in you?"

"If she were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?"

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'Our loved ones
are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.'

What do you think, great king? Do you love Lady Vāsabhā? ...

Do you love your son, General Viḍūḍabha? ...

Do you love me?"

"Indeed I do love you, Mallikā."

"What do you think, great king? If I were to decay and perish, would
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in you?"

"If you were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?"

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'Our loved ones
are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.'

What do you think, great king? Do you love the realms of Kāsi and
Kosala?"[1558](endnotes.xhtml_note-1558){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1558
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed I do, Mallikā. It's due to the bounty of Kāsi and Kosala that we
use sandalwood imported from Kāsi and wear garlands, fragrance, and
makeup."

"What do you think, great king? If these realms were to decay and
perish, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in
you?"

"If they were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?"

"This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said: 'Our loved ones
are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.'"

"It's incredible, Mallikā, it's amazing, how far the Buddha sees with
penetrating wisdom, it seems to me. Come, Mallikā, rinse my
hands."[1559](endnotes.xhtml_note-1559){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1559
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then King Pasenadi got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one
shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this
heartfelt sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!"

</article>
<article id="mn88">

### [MN 88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Imported Cloth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bāhitikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. He wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After
the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Eastern
Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother, for the day's
meditation.

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala mounted the Single Lotus
Elephant and drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the
day.[1560](endnotes.xhtml_note-1560){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1560
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw Ānanda coming off in the distance
and said to the minister
Sirivaḍḍha,[1561](endnotes.xhtml_note-1561){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1561
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "My dear Sirivaḍḍha, isn't that Venerable
Ānanda?"

"Indeed it is, great king."

Then King Pasenadi addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to Venerable
Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir,
King Pasenadi of Kosala bows with his head at your feet.' And then say:
'Sir, if you have no urgent business, please wait an hour out of
sympathy.'"

"Yes, Your Majesty," that man replied. He did as the king asked.

Ānanda consented with silence.

Then King Pasenadi rode on the elephant as far as the terrain allowed,
then descended and approached Ānanda on foot. He bowed, stood to one
side, and said to Ānanda, "Sir, if you have no urgent business, it would
be nice of you to go to the bank of the Aciravatī river out of
sympathy."

Ānanda consented with silence.

He went to the river bank and sat at the root of a certain tree on a
seat spread out. Then King Pasenadi rode on the elephant as far as the
terrain allowed, then descended and approached Ānanda on foot. He bowed,
stood to one side, and said to Ānanda, "Here, Venerable Ānanda, sit on
this elephant rug."

"Enough, great king, you sit on it. I'm sitting on my own seat."

So the king sat down on the seat spread out, and said, "Honorable
Ānanda, would the Buddha engage in the sort of behavior---by way of
body, speech, or mind---that is faulted by ascetics and
brahmins?"[1562](endnotes.xhtml_note-1562){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1562
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, great king, the Buddha would not engage in the sort of behavior
that is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! For I couldn't fully express the
question, but Venerable Ānanda's answer completed it for
me.[1563](endnotes.xhtml_note-1563){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1563
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't believe that praise or criticism of
others spoken by incompetent fools, without examining or scrutinizing,
is the most important thing. Rather, I believe that praise or criticism
of others spoken by competent and intelligent people after examining and
scrutinizing is the most important thing.

But Honorable Ānanda, what kind of bodily behavior is faulted by
sensible ascetics and
brahmins?"[1564](endnotes.xhtml_note-1564){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1564
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Unskillful
behavior."[1565](endnotes.xhtml_note-1565){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1565
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what kind of bodily behavior is unskillful?"

"Blameworthy
behavior."[1566](endnotes.xhtml_note-1566){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1566
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what kind of bodily behavior is blameworthy?"

"Hurtful
behavior."[1567](endnotes.xhtml_note-1567){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1567
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what kind of bodily behavior is hurtful?"

"Behavior that results in
suffering."[1568](endnotes.xhtml_note-1568){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1568
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what kind of bodily behavior results in suffering?"

"Bodily behavior that leads to hurting yourself, hurting others, and
hurting
both,[1569](endnotes.xhtml_note-1569){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1569
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and which makes unskillful qualities grow
while skillful qualities decline. That kind of bodily behavior is
faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins."

"But what kind of verbal behavior ... mental behavior is faulted by
sensible ascetics and brahmins?" ...

"Mental behavior that leads to hurting yourself, hurting others, and
hurting both, and which makes unskillful qualities grow while skillful
qualities decline. That kind of mental behavior is faulted by sensible
ascetics and brahmins."

"Sir, does the Buddha praise giving up all these unskillful things?"

"Great king, the Realized One has given up all unskillful things and
possesses skillful things."

"But sir, what kind of bodily behavior is not faulted by sensible
ascetics and
brahmins?"[1570](endnotes.xhtml_note-1570){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1570
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Skillful behavior."

"But what kind of bodily behavior is skillful?"

"Blameless behavior."

"But what kind of bodily behavior is blameless?"

"Pleasing behavior."

"But what kind of bodily behavior is pleasing?"

"Behavior that results in happiness."

"But what kind of bodily behavior results in happiness?"

"Bodily behavior that leads to pleasing yourself, pleasing others, and
pleasing both, and which makes unskillful qualities decline while
skillful qualities grow. That kind of bodily behavior is not faulted by
sensible ascetics and brahmins."

"But what kind of verbal behavior ... mental behavior is not faulted by
sensible ascetics and brahmins?" ...

"Mental behavior that leads to pleasing yourself, pleasing others, and
pleasing both, and which makes unskillful qualities decline while
skillful qualities grow. That kind of mental behavior is not faulted by
sensible ascetics and brahmins."

"Sir, does the Buddha praise embracing all these skillful things?"

"Great king, the Realized One has given up all unskillful things and
possesses skillful
things."[1571](endnotes.xhtml_note-1571){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1571
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well this was said by Venerable
Ānanda! I'm delighted and satisfied with what you've expressed so well.
So much so that if an elephant-treasure was suitable for you, I would
give you one. If a horse-treasure was suitable for you, I would give you
one. If a prize village was suitable for you, I would give you one. But,
sir, I know that these things are not suitable for
you.[1572](endnotes.xhtml_note-1572){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1572
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This imported cloth was sent to me by King
Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, packed in a
parasol case. It's exactly sixteen measures long and eight
wide.[1573](endnotes.xhtml_note-1573){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1573
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} May Venerable Ānanda please accept it out
of sympathy."

"Enough, great king. My three robes are complete."

"Sir, we have both seen this river Aciravatī when it has rained heavily
in the mountains, and the river overflows both its banks. In the same
way, Venerable Ānanda can make a set of three robes for himself from
this imported cloak, and you can share your old robes with your fellow
monks. In this way my religious donation will come to overflow, it seems
to me. Please accept the imported cloth."

So Ānanda accepted it.

Then King Pasenadi said to him, "Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many
duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience." Then King Pasenadi
approved and agreed with what Ānanda said. He got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled Ānanda, keeping him on his right, before
leaving.

Soon after he left, Ānanda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened. He presented the cloth to the
Buddha.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

"Mendicants, King Pasenadi is lucky, so very lucky, to get to see Ānanda
and pay homage to him."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn89">

### [MN 89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shrines to the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammacetiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named
Medaḷumpa.[1574](endnotes.xhtml_note-1574){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1574
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Townsville on
some
business.[1575](endnotes.xhtml_note-1575){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1575
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then he addressed Dīgha Kārāyana, "My good Kārāyana, harness the finest
chariots. We will go to a park and see the scenery."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots
and informed the king, "Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please
go at your convenience."

Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out in full royal pomp from Townsville, heading for the
park
grounds.[1576](endnotes.xhtml_note-1576){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1576
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and entered the park on foot.

As he was going for a walk in the park he saw roots of trees that were
impressive and inspiring, quiet and still, far from the madding crowd,
remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat. The sight reminded
him right away of the Buddha: "These roots of trees, so impressive and
inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha."[1577](endnotes.xhtml_note-1577){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1577
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He addressed Dīgha Kārāyana, "These roots of trees, so impressive and
inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. My good Kārāyana,
where is that Buddha at present?"

"Great king, there is a Sakyan town named Medaḷumpa. That's where the
Buddha is now staying."

"But how far away is that town?"

"Not far, great king, it's three leagues. We can get there while it's
still light."

"Well then, harness the chariots, and we shall go to see the Buddha."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots
and informed the king, "Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please
go at your convenience."

Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out from Townsville to Medaḷumpa. He reached the town
while it was still light and headed for the monastery grounds. He went
by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered
the monastery on foot.

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air.
King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, "Sirs, where is the
Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?
For I want to see him."

"Great king, that's his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it
quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and
knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door." The king right
away presented his sword and turban to Dīgha Kārāyana, who thought, "Now
the king seeks privacy. I should wait
here."[1578](endnotes.xhtml_note-1578){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1578
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the king approached the Buddha's dwelling, cleared his throat and
knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door.

King Pasenadi entered the dwelling, and bowed with his head at the
Buddha's feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and
pronounced his
name:[1579](endnotes.xhtml_note-1579){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1579
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! I am
Pasenadi, king of Kosala!"

"But great king, for what reason do you demonstrate such utmost devotion
for this body, conveying your manifest love?"

"Sir, I infer about the Buddha from the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is
practicing
well.'[1580](endnotes.xhtml_note-1580){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1580
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It happens, sir, that I see some ascetics
and brahmins leading the spiritual life only for a limited period: ten,
twenty, thirty, or forty years. Some time later---nicely bathed and
anointed, with hair and beard dressed---they amuse themselves, supplied
and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation.[1581](endnotes.xhtml_note-1581){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1581
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But here I see the mendicants leading the
spiritual life entirely full and pure as long as they live, to their
last
breath.[1582](endnotes.xhtml_note-1582){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1582
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any other spiritual life
elsewhere so full and pure. That's why I infer this about the Buddha
from the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, kings fight with kings, aristocrats fight with aristocrats,
brahmins fight with brahmins, householders fight with householders. A
mother fights with her child, child with mother, father with child, and
child with father. Brother fights with brother, brother with sister,
sister with brother, and friend fights with
friend.[1583](endnotes.xhtml_note-1583){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1583
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But here I see the mendicants living in
harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk
and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. I don't see any
other assembly elsewhere so harmonious. So I infer this about the Buddha
from the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, I have walked and wandered from monastery to monastery and
from park to park. There I've seen some ascetics and brahmins who are
thin, haggard, pale, and veiny---hardly a captivating sight for people,
you'd
think.[1584](endnotes.xhtml_note-1584){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1584
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It occurred to me: 'Clearly these
venerables lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or they're hiding some
bad deed they've done. That's why they're thin, haggard, pale, and
veiny---hardly a captivating sight for people, you'd think.' I went up
to them and said: 'Venerables, why are you so thin, haggard, pale, and
veiny---hardly a captivating sight for people, you'd think?' They say:
'We have jaundice, great
king.'[1585](endnotes.xhtml_note-1585){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1585
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But here I see mendicants always smiling
and joyful, obviously happy, with cheerful faces, living relaxed,
unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a wild deer. It
occurred to me: 'Clearly these venerables have realized a higher
distinction in the Buddha's instructions than they had before. That's
why these venerables are always smiling and joyful, obviously happy,
with cheerful faces, living relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity,
their hearts free as a wild deer.' So I infer this about the Buddha from
the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching
is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, as an anointed aristocratic king I am able to execute,
fine, or banish those who are guilty. Yet when I'm sitting in judgment
they interrupt me. And I can't get them to stop interrupting me and wait
until I've finished
speaking.[1586](endnotes.xhtml_note-1586){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1586
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But here I've seen the mendicants while the
Buddha is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, and there is no sound
of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. Once it so happened
that the Buddha was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. Then one of
his disciples cleared their throat. And one of their spiritual
companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate: 'Hush, venerable,
don't make a sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!' It
occurred to me: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing, how an assembly can be
so well trained without rod or
sword!'[1587](endnotes.xhtml_note-1587){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1587
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't see any other assembly elsewhere so
well
trained.[1588](endnotes.xhtml_note-1588){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1588
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I infer this about the Buddha from the
teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is
well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, I've seen some clever aristocrats who are subtle,
accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd think
they live to demolish convictions with their
intellect.[1589](endnotes.xhtml_note-1589){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1589
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They hear: 'So, gentlemen, that ascetic
Gotama will come down to such and such village or town.' They formulate
a question, thinking: 'We'll approach the ascetic Gotama and ask him
this question. If he answers like this, we'll refute him like that; and
if he answers like that, we'll refute him like this.' When they hear
that he has come down they approach him. The Buddha educates,
encourages, fires up, and inspires them with a Dhamma talk. They don't
even get around to asking their question to the Buddha, so how could
they refute his answer? Invariably, they become his disciples. So I
infer this about the Buddha from the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is
practicing well.'

Furthermore, I see some clever brahmins ... some clever householders ...
some clever ascetics who are subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of
others, hair-splitters. ... They don't even get around to asking their
question to the Buddha, so how could they refute his answer? Invariably,
they ask the ascetic Gotama for the chance to go forth. And he gives
them the going-forth. Soon after going forth, living withdrawn,
diligent, keen, and resolute, they realize the supreme end of the
spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with their
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness. They say: 'We were almost lost! We almost
perished! For we used to claim that we were ascetics, brahmins, and
perfected ones, but we were none of these things. But now we really are
ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones!' So I infer this about the
Buddha from the teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha.
The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, these chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and
my carriages. I give them a livelihood and bring them renown. And yet
they don't show me the same level of devotion that they show to the
Buddha. Once it so happened that while I was leading a military campaign
and testing Isidatta and Purāṇa I took up residence in a cramped house.
They spent much of the night discussing the teaching, then they lay down
with their heads towards where the Buddha was and their feet towards me.
It occurred to me: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! These chamberlains
Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and my carriages. I give them a
livelihood and bring them renown. And yet they don't show me the same
level of devotion that they show to the Buddha. Clearly these venerables
have realized a higher distinction in the Buddha's instructions than
they had
before.'[1590](endnotes.xhtml_note-1590){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1590
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So I infer this about the Buddha from the
teaching: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is
well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

Furthermore, the Buddha is an aristocrat, and so am I. The Buddha is
Kosalan, and so am
I.[1591](endnotes.xhtml_note-1591){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1591
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha is eighty years old, and so am
I.[1592](endnotes.xhtml_note-1592){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1592
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Since this is so, it's proper for me to
show the Buddha such utmost devotion and demonstrate such friendship.

Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience." Then King Pasenadi got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before
leaving.[1593](endnotes.xhtml_note-1593){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1593
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Soon after the king had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Mendicants, before he got up and left, King Pasenadi spoke shrines to
the teaching. Learn these shrines to the teaching! Memorize these
shrines to the teaching! Remember these shrines to the teaching! These
shrines to the teaching are beneficial and relate to the fundamentals of
the spiritual life."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn90">

### [MN 90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kaṇṇakatthala ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kaṇṇakatthalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1594](endnotes.xhtml_note-1594){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1594
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Ujuññā, in the deer park at
Kaṇṇakatthala.[1595](endnotes.xhtml_note-1595){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1595
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Ujuññā on some
business. Then he addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to the Buddha,
and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy
and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then say: 'Sir,
King Pasenadi of Kosala will come to see you today when he has finished
breakfast.'"

"Yes, Your Majesty," that man replied. He did as the king asked.

The sisters Somā and Sakulā heard
this.[1596](endnotes.xhtml_note-1596){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1596
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} While the meal was being served, they
approached the king and said, "Great king, since you are going to the
Buddha, please bow in our name with your head to his feet. Ask him if he
is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably."

When he had finished breakfast, King Pasenadi went to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the sisters Somā and Sakulā
bow with their heads to your feet. They ask if you are healthy and well,
nimble, strong, and living comfortably."

"But, great king, couldn't they get any other messenger?"

So Pasenadi explained the circumstances of the message. The Buddha said,
"May the sisters Somā and Sakulā be happy, great king."

Then the king said to the Buddha, "I have heard, sir, that the ascetic
Gotama says this: 'There is no ascetic or brahmin who will ever claim to
be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without
exception: that is not
possible.'[1597](endnotes.xhtml_note-1597){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1597
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do those who say this repeat what the
Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their
explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds
for rebuttal and criticism?"

"Great king, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false and untrue."

Then King Pasenadi addressed General
Viḍūḍabha,[1598](endnotes.xhtml_note-1598){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1598
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "General, who introduced this topic of
discussion to the royal compound?"

"It was Sañjaya, great king, the brahmin of the Ākāsa
clan."[1599](endnotes.xhtml_note-1599){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1599
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the king addressed a man, "Please, mister, in my name tell Sañjaya
that King Pasenadi summons him."

"Yes, Your Majesty," that man replied. He did as the king asked.

Then the king said to the Buddha, "Sir, might the Buddha have spoken in
reference to one thing, but that person believed it was something else?
How then do you recall making this statement?"

"Great king, I recall making this statement: 'There is no ascetic or
brahmin who will ever know all and see all simultaneously: that is not
possible.'"[1600](endnotes.xhtml_note-1600){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1600
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What the Buddha says appears reasonable.

Sir, there are these four classes: aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials. Is there any difference between them?"

"Of the four classes, two are said to be preeminent---the aristocrats
and the brahmins. That is, when it comes to bowing down, rising up,
greeting with joined palms, and observing proper
etiquette."[1601](endnotes.xhtml_note-1601){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1601
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, I am not asking you about the present life, but about the life to
come."

"Great king, there are these five factors that support meditation. What
five? It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. They're
not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher
or sensible spiritual companions. They live with energy roused up for
giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're
strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. These are the five factors that support meditation.
There are these four classes: aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials. If they had these five factors that support meditation, that
would be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

"Sir, there are these four classes: aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials. If they had these five factors that support meditation, would
there be any difference between them?"

"In that case, I say it is the diversity of their efforts in meditation.
Suppose there was a pair of elephants or horses or oxen in training who
were well tamed and well trained. And there was a pair who were not
tamed or trained. What do you think, great king? Wouldn't the pair that
was well tamed and well trained perform the tasks of the tamed, and
reach the level of the tamed?"

"Yes, sir."

"But would the pair that was not tamed and trained perform the tasks of
the tamed and reach the level of the tamed, just like the tamed pair?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, there are things that must be attained by someone with
faith, health, integrity, energy, and wisdom. It's not possible for a
faithless, unhealthy, deceitful, lazy, witless person to attain them."

"What the Buddha says appears reasonable. Sir, there are these four
classes: aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and workers. If they had these
five factors that support meditation, and if they practiced rightly,
would there be any difference between them?"

"In that case, I say that there is no difference between the freedom of
one and the freedom of the other. Suppose a person took dry teak wood
and lit a fire and produced heat. Then another person did the same using
sāl wood, another used mango wood, while another used wood of the
cluster fig. What do you think, great king? Would there be any
difference between the fires produced by these different kinds of wood,
that is, in the flame, color, or light?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when fire has been churned by energy and produced by
effort, I say that there is no difference between the freedom of one and
the freedom of the
other."[1602](endnotes.xhtml_note-1602){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1602
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What the Buddha says appears reasonable. But sir, do gods
survive?"[1603](endnotes.xhtml_note-1603){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1603
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But what exactly are you
asking?"[1604](endnotes.xhtml_note-1604){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1604
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Whether those gods come back to this place or not."

"Those gods who are afflicted come back to this place, but those who are
unafflicted do not come
back."[1605](endnotes.xhtml_note-1605){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1605
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he said this, General Viḍūḍabha said to the Buddha, "Sir, will the
gods who are afflicted topple or expel from their place the gods who are
unafflicted?"[1606](endnotes.xhtml_note-1606){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1606
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "This General Viḍūḍabha is King
Pasenadi's son, and I am the Buddha's son. Now is the time for one son
to confer with another." So Ānanda addressed General Viḍūḍabha, "Well
then, general, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as
you like. What do you think, general? As far as the dominion of King
Pasenadi of Kosala extends, where he rules as sovereign lord, can he
topple or expel from that place any ascetic or brahmin, regardless of
whether they are good or bad, or whether or not they are genuine
spiritual practitioners?"

"He can,
mister."[1607](endnotes.xhtml_note-1607){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1607
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, general? As far as the dominion of King Pasenadi
does not extend, where he does not rule as sovereign lord, can he topple
or expel from that place any ascetic or brahmin, regardless of whether
they are good or bad, or whether or not they are genuine spiritual
practitioners?"

"He cannot, mister."

"What do you think, general? Have you heard of the gods of the
thirty-three?"

"Yes, mister, I've heard of them, and so has the good King Pasenadi."

"What do you think, general? Can King Pasenadi topple or expel from
their place the gods of the thirty-three?"

"King Pasenadi can't even see the gods of the thirty-three, so how could
he possibly topple or expel them from their place?"

"In the same way, general, the gods who are afflicted can't even see the
gods who are unafflicted, so how could they possibly topple or expel
them from their
place?"[1608](endnotes.xhtml_note-1608){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1608
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the king said to the Buddha, "Sir, what is this mendicant's
name?"[1609](endnotes.xhtml_note-1609){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1609
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Ānanda, great king."

"A joy he is, and a joy he seems! What Venerable Ānanda says seems
reasonable. But sir, does Brahmā survive?"

"But what exactly are you asking?"

"Whether that Brahmā comes back to this place or not."

"A Brahmā who is afflicted comes back to this place, but one who is
unafflicted does not come back."

Then a certain man said to the king, "Great king, Sañjaya, the brahmin
of the Ākāsa clan, has come."

Then King Pasenadi asked Sañjaya, "Brahmin, who introduced this topic of
discussion to the royal compound?"

"It was General Viḍūḍabha, great king."

But Viḍūḍabha said, "It was Sañjaya, great king, the brahmin of the
Ākāsa
clan."[1610](endnotes.xhtml_note-1610){#mn-rajavagga.xhtml_noteref-1610
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then a certain man said to the king, "It's time to depart, great king."

So the king said to the Buddha, "Sir, I asked you about omniscience, and
you answered. I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it. I
asked you about purification in the four classes, about the gods, and
about Brahmā, and you answered in each case. Whatever I asked the Buddha
about, he answered. I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it.
Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience."

Then King Pasenadi approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then
he got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

</article>

[]{#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Brahmins {#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_mn-brahmanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn91">

### [MN 91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Brahmāyu ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brahmāyusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the
Videhans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants.[1611](endnotes.xhtml_note-1611){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1611
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu was residing in Mithilā. He was
old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, having reached the final
stage of life; he was a hundred and twenty years old. He had mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well
versed in cosmology and the marks of a great
man.[1612](endnotes.xhtml_note-1612){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1612
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He heard: "It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a
Sakyan family---is wandering in the land of the Videhans, together with
a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu had a student named Uttara. He too
had mastered the Vedic
curriculum.[1613](endnotes.xhtml_note-1613){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1613
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Brahmāyu told Uttara of the Buddha's
presence in the land of the Videhans, and added: "Please, dear Uttara,
go to the ascetic Gotama and find out whether or not he lives up to his
reputation.[1614](endnotes.xhtml_note-1614){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1614
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Through you I shall learn about Mister
Gotama."[1615](endnotes.xhtml_note-1615){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1615
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how shall I find out whether or not the ascetic Gotama lives
up to his reputation?"

"Dear Uttara, the thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed down
in our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible
destinies, no
other.[1616](endnotes.xhtml_note-1616){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1616
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven
treasures.[1617](endnotes.xhtml_note-1617){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1617
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He has the following seven
treasures:[1618](endnotes.xhtml_note-1618){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1618
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the
jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh
treasure. He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his
enemies.[1619](endnotes.xhtml_note-1619){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1619
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} After conquering this land girt by sea, he
reigns by principle, without rod or sword. But if he goes forth from the
lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. But, dear Uttara, I am
the one who gives the hymns, and you are the one who receives them."

"Yes, sir," replied Uttara. He got up from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled Brahmāyu before setting out for the land of the
Videhans where the Buddha was wandering. Traveling stage by stage, he
came to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings
and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and
scrutinized his body for the thirty-two marks of a great man. He saw all
of them except for two, which he had doubts about: whether the private
parts are covered in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "This brahmin student Uttara sees all
the marks except for two, which he has doubts about: whether the private
parts are covered in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue."

So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Uttara would see his
private parts covered in a foreskin. And he stuck out his tongue and
stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his
entire forehead with his tongue.

Then Uttara thought, "The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks.
Why don't I follow him and observe his deportment?" So Uttara followed
the Buddha like a shadow for seven
months.[1620](endnotes.xhtml_note-1620){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1620
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When seven months had passed he set out wandering towards Mithilā. There
he approached the brahmin Brahmāyu, bowed, and sat down to one side.
Brahmāyu said to him, "Well, dear Uttara, does Mister Gotama live up to
his reputation or not?"

"He does, sir. Mister Gotama possesses the thirty-two
marks.[1621](endnotes.xhtml_note-1621){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1621
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has well-planted
feet.[1622](endnotes.xhtml_note-1622){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1622
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and
hubs, complete in every
detail.[1623](endnotes.xhtml_note-1623){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1623
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has stretched
heels.[1624](endnotes.xhtml_note-1624){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1624
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has long
fingers.[1625](endnotes.xhtml_note-1625){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1625
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hands and feet are
tender.[1626](endnotes.xhtml_note-1626){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1626
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has serried hands and
feet.[1627](endnotes.xhtml_note-1627){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1627
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The tops of his feet are
arched.[1628](endnotes.xhtml_note-1628){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1628
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His calves are like those of an
antelope.[1629](endnotes.xhtml_note-1629){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1629
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands
touch the
knees.[1630](endnotes.xhtml_note-1630){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1630
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His private parts are covered in a
foreskin.[1631](endnotes.xhtml_note-1631){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1631
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous
gold.[1632](endnotes.xhtml_note-1632){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1632
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.[1633](endnotes.xhtml_note-1633){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1633
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hairs grow one per
pore.[1634](endnotes.xhtml_note-1634){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1634
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His hairs stand up; they're blue-black and curl
clockwise.[1635](endnotes.xhtml_note-1635){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1635
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His body is tall and
straight-limbed.[1636](endnotes.xhtml_note-1636){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1636
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has bulging muscles in seven
places.[1637](endnotes.xhtml_note-1637){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1637
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His chest is like that of a
lion.[1638](endnotes.xhtml_note-1638){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1638
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He is filled out between the
shoulders.[1639](endnotes.xhtml_note-1639){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1639
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his
arms equals the height of his
body.[1640](endnotes.xhtml_note-1640){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1640
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His torso is cylindrical.

He has ridged taste
buds.[1641](endnotes.xhtml_note-1641){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1641
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His jaw is like that of a lion.

He has forty teeth.

His teeth are
even.[1642](endnotes.xhtml_note-1642){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1642
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

His teeth have no gaps.

His teeth are perfectly white.

He has a large
tongue.[1643](endnotes.xhtml_note-1643){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1643
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has the voice of Brahmā, like a cuckoo's call.

His eyes are
indigo.[1644](endnotes.xhtml_note-1644){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1644
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He has eyelashes like a
cow's.[1645](endnotes.xhtml_note-1645){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1645
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like
cotton-wool.

The crown of his head is like a
turban.[1646](endnotes.xhtml_note-1646){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1646
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man possessed by Mister
Gotama.

When he's walking he takes the first step with the right
foot.[1647](endnotes.xhtml_note-1647){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1647
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He doesn't lift his foot too far or place
it too near. He doesn't walk too slow or too fast. He walks without
knocking his knees or ankles
together.[1648](endnotes.xhtml_note-1648){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1648
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he's walking he keeps his thighs
neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose. When
he walks, only the lower half of his body moves, and he walks
effortlessly. When he turns to look he does so with the whole
body.[1649](endnotes.xhtml_note-1649){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1649
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He doesn't look directly up or down. He
doesn't look all around while walking, but focuses a plough's length in
front. Beyond that he has unhindered knowledge and
vision.[1650](endnotes.xhtml_note-1650){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1650
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When entering an inhabited area he keeps his body neither too straight
nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

He turns around neither too far nor too close to the seat. He doesn't
lean on his hand when sitting down. And he doesn't just plonk his body
down on the seat. When sitting in inhabited areas he doesn't fidget with
his hands or feet. He doesn't sit with his knees or ankles crossed. He
doesn't sit with his hand holding his chin. When sitting in inhabited
areas he doesn't shake, tremble, quake, or get nervous, and so he is not
nervous at all. When sitting in inhabited areas he still practices
seclusion.

When receiving water for rinsing the bowl, he holds the bowl neither too
straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

He receives neither too little nor too much water. He rinses the bowl
without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn't put
the bowl on the ground to rinse his hands; his hands and bowl are rinsed
at the same time. He doesn't throw the bowl rinsing water away too far
or too near, or splash it about. When receiving rice, he holds the bowl
neither too straight nor too bent, neither too close nor too loose. He
receives neither too little nor too much rice. He eats sauce in a
moderate proportion, and doesn't put too much sauce on his portions. He
chews over each portion two or three times before swallowing. But no
grain of rice enters his body unchewed, and none remain in his mouth.
Only then does he raise another portion to his lips. He eats
experiencing the taste, but without experiencing greed for the taste.

He eats food thinking of eight reasons: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable
abiding.'[1651](endnotes.xhtml_note-1651){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1651
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

After eating, when receiving water for washing the bowl, he holds the
bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.
He receives neither too little nor too much water. He washes the bowl
without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn't put
the bowl on the ground to wash his hands; his hands and bowl are washed
at the same time. He doesn't throw the bowl washing water away too far
or too near, or splash it about.

After eating he doesn't put the bowl on the ground too far away or too
close. He's not careless with his bowl, nor does he spend too much time
on it.

After eating he sits for a minute in silence, but doesn't wait too long
to give the verses of appreciation. After eating he expresses
appreciation without criticizing the meal or expecting another
one.[1652](endnotes.xhtml_note-1652){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1652
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires
up, and inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk. Then he gets up from
his seat and leaves.

He walks neither too fast nor too slow, without wanting to get out of
there.

He wears his robe on his body neither too high nor too low, neither too
clinging nor too loose. The wind doesn't blow his robe off his body. And
dust and dirt don't stick to his body.

When he has gone to the monastery he sits on a seat spread out and
washes his feet. But he doesn't waste time with pedicures. When he has
washed his feet, he sits down cross-legged, sets his body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in his presence. He has no intention to hurt
himself, hurt others, or hurt both. He only wishes for the welfare of
himself, of others, of both, and of the whole world. In the monastery
when he teaches Dhamma to an assembly, he neither flatters them nor
rebukes them. Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires up, and
inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk.

The sound of his voice has eight qualities: it is clear, comprehensible,
charming, audible, lucid, undistorted, deep, and resonant. He makes sure
his voice is intelligible as far as the assembly goes, but the sound
doesn't extend outside the assembly. And when they've been inspired with
a Dhamma talk by Mister Gotama they get up from their seats and leave
looking back at him alone, and not forgetting their lesson.

I have seen Mister Gotama walking and standing; entering inhabited
areas, and sitting and eating there; sitting silently after eating, and
expressing appreciation; going to the monastery, sitting silently there,
and teaching Dhamma to an assembly there. Such is Mister Gotama; such he
is and more than that."

When he had spoken, the brahmin Brahmāyu got up from his seat, arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and uttered this aphorism three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Hopefully, some time or other I'll get to meet him, and we can have a
discussion."

And then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the Videhan lands,
arrived at Mithilā, where he stayed in the Maghadeva Mango
Grove.[1653](endnotes.xhtml_note-1653){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1653
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Mithilā heard: "It seems the ascetic
Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---has arrived at
Mithilā, where he is staying in the Maghadeva Mango Grove. He has this
good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the
world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and
humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to
see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Mithilā went up to the Buddha.
Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings
and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the
Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

The brahmin Brahmāyu also heard that the Buddha had arrived. So he went
to the Maghadeva Mango Grove together with several disciples.

Not far from the grove he thought, "It wouldn't be appropriate for me to
go to see the ascetic Gotama without first letting him
know."[1654](endnotes.xhtml_note-1654){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1654
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So he addressed one of his students: "Here, student, go to the ascetic
Gotama and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is
healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then say:
'Mister Gotama, the brahmin Brahmāyu is old, elderly, and senior,
advanced in years, having reached the final stage of life; he is a
hundred and twenty years old. He has mastered the three Vedas, together
with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great man. Of all the brahmins and householders residing in Mithilā,
Brahmāyu is said to be the foremost in wealth, hymns, lifespan, and
fame. He wants to see Mister Gotama.'"

"Yes, sir," that student replied. He did as he was asked, and the Buddha
said, "Please, student, let Brahmāyu come when he's ready."

The student went back to Brahmāyu and said to him, "Your request for an
audience with the ascetic Gotama has been granted. Please go at your
convenience."

Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha. The assembly saw him
coming off in the distance, and made way for him, as he was well-known
and famous.

Brahmāyu said to that retinue, "Enough, gentlemen. Please sit on your
own seats. I shall sit here by the ascetic Gotama."

Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side, and scrutinized the Buddha's body for the thirty-two
marks of a great man. He saw all of them except for two, which he had
doubts about: whether the private parts are covered in a foreskin, and
the largeness of the tongue. Then Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in
verse:

> "I have learned of the thirty-two\
> marks of a great man.\
> There are two that I don't see\
> on the body of Mister Gotama.
>
> Are the private parts covered in a foreskin,\
> O supreme person?\
> Though called by a word of the feminine
> gender,[1655](endnotes.xhtml_note-1655){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1655
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> perhaps your tongue is a manly
> one?[1656](endnotes.xhtml_note-1656){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1656
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Perhaps your tongue is large,\
> as we have been informed.\
> Please stick it out in its full extent,\
> and so, O seer, dispel my doubt.
>
> For my welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> And I ask you to grant the opportunity\
> to ask whatever I desire."

Then the Buddha thought, "Brahmāyu sees all the marks except for two,
which he has doubts about: whether the private parts are covered in a
foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue."

So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Brahmāyu would see his
private parts covered in a foreskin. And he stuck out his tongue and
stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his
entire forehead with his tongue.

Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse:

> "The thirty-two marks of a great man\
> that you have learned\
> are all found on my body:\
> so do not doubt, brahmin.
>
> I have known what should be
> known,[1657](endnotes.xhtml_note-1657){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1657
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and developed what should be developed,\
> and given up what should be given up:\
> and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha.
>
> For your welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next:\
> I grant you the opportunity\
> to ask whatever you desire."

Then Brahmāyu thought:

"My request has been granted. Should I ask him about what is beneficial
in this life or the next?" Then he thought, "I'm well versed in the
benefits that apply to this life, and others ask me about this. Why
don't I ask the ascetic Gotama about the benefit that specifically
applies to lives to come?"

So Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in verse:

> "How do you become a
> brahmin?[1658](endnotes.xhtml_note-1658){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1658
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> And how do you become a knowledge master?\
> How a master of the three knowledges?\
> And how is one called a scholar?
>
> How do you become a perfected one?\
> And how a consummate one?\
> How do you become a sage?\
> And how is one declared to be awakened?"

Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse:

> "One who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the end of rebirth:\
> such a sage has perfect insight.
>
> They know their mind is pure,\
> completely freed from greed;\
> they've given up birth and death,\
> and have completed the spiritual journey.\
> Gone beyond all things,\
> such a one is declared to be awakened."

When he said this, Brahmāyu got up from his seat and arranged his robe
on one shoulder. He bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet, caressing
them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: "I am the
brahmin Brahmāyu, Mister Gotama! I am the brahmin Brahmāyu!"

Then that assembly, their minds full of wonder and amazement, thought,
"Oh, how incredible, how amazing, that Brahmāyu, who is so well-known
and famous, should show the Buddha such utmost devotion." Then the
Buddha said to Brahmāyu, "Enough, brahmin. Get up, and sit in your own
seat, since your mind has such confidence in me." So Brahmāyu got up and
sat in his own seat.

Then the Buddha taught him step by step, with a talk on giving, ethical
conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so
sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. And when the Buddha
knew that Brahmāyu's mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated,
and confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas:
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean
cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very seat the
stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the brahmin
Brahmāyu: "Everything that has a beginning has an end."

Then Brahmāyu saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He
went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. He said to
the Buddha:

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life. Would you and the mendicant
Saṅgha please accept a meal from me tomorrow?" The Buddha consented with
silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Brahmāyu got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

And when the night had passed Brahmāyu had delicious fresh and cooked
foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the
time, saying, "It's time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of the brahmin Brahmāyu, where he sat on the seat
spread out, together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. For seven days,
Brahmāyu served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha
with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the seven days had passed, the Buddha departed to wander in the
Videhan lands. Not long after the Buddha left, Brahmāyu passed away.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, Brahmāyu has passed away. Where has he been
reborn in his next life?"

"Mendicants, the brahmin Brahmāyu was astute. He practiced in line with
the teachings, and did not trouble me about the teachings. With the
ending of the five lower fetters, he's been reborn spontaneously and
will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn92">

### [MN 92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sela ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Selasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1659](endnotes.xhtml_note-1659){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1659
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was
wandering together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants in the land
of the Aṅguttarāpans when he arrived at a town of theirs named Āpaṇa.

The matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya heard: "It seems the ascetic Gotama---a
Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---has arrived at Āpaṇa, together
with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

So Keṇiya approached the Buddha and exchanged greetings with
him.[1660](endnotes.xhtml_note-1660){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1660
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side. The Buddha educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk.

Then he said to the Buddha, "Would Mister Gotama together with the
mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's meal from me?"

When he said this, the Buddha said to him, "The Saṅgha is large, Keṇiya;
there are 1,250 mendicants. And you are devoted to the brahmins."

For a second time, Keṇiya asked the Buddha to accept a meal offering.
"Never mind that the Saṅgha is large, with 1,250 mendicants, and that I
am devoted to the brahmins. Would Mister Gotama together with the
mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow's meal from me?" And for a
second time, the Buddha gave the same reply. For a third time, Keṇiya
asked the Buddha to accept a meal offering. "Never mind that the Saṅgha
is large, with 1,250 mendicants, and that I am devoted to the brahmins.
Would Mister Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha please accept
tomorrow's meal from me?" The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Keṇiya got up from his seat
and went to his own hermitage. There he addressed his friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin, "My friends and colleagues, relatives and
kin: please listen! The ascetic Gotama together with the mendicant
Saṅgha has been invited by me for tomorrow's meal. Please help me out
with the manual
preparations."[1661](endnotes.xhtml_note-1661){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1661
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," they replied. Some dug ovens, some chopped wood, some washed
dishes, some set out a water jar, and some spread out seats. Meanwhile,
Keṇiya set up the pavilion himself.

Now at that time the brahmin Sela was residing in Āpaṇa. He had mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well
versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. And he was teaching
three hundred students to recite the hymns.

And at that time Keṇiya was devoted to Sela. Then Sela, while going for
a walk escorted by the three hundred students, approached Keṇiya's
hermitage. He saw the preparations going on, and said to Keṇiya,
"Keṇiya, is your son or daughter being married? Or are you setting up a
big sacrifice? Or has King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha been invited for
tomorrow's
meal?"[1662](endnotes.xhtml_note-1662){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1662
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There is no marriage, Sela, and the king is not coming. Rather, I am
setting up a big sacrifice. The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Āpaṇa,
together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. He has this good
reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.' He has been invited by me for tomorrow's meal
together with the mendicant Saṅgha."

"Mister Keṇiya, did you say 'the awakened
one'?"[1663](endnotes.xhtml_note-1663){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1663
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I said 'the awakened one'."

"Did you say 'the awakened one'?"

"I said 'the awakened one'."

Then Sela thought, "It's hard to even find the word 'awakened one' in
the world. The thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed down in
our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible
destinies, no other. If he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven treasures. He has the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and
the counselor as the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons who
are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After
conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or
sword. But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he
becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the
veil from the world."

"But Keṇiya, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha?"

When he said this, Keṇiya pointed with his right arm and said, "There,
Mister Sela, at that line of blue forest."

Then Sela, together with his students, approached the Buddha. He said to
his students, "Come quietly, gentlemen, tread gently. For the Buddhas
are intimidating, like a lion living
alone.[1664](endnotes.xhtml_note-1664){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1664
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When I'm consulting with the ascetic
Gotama, don't interrupt. Wait until I've finished speaking."

Then Sela went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and scrutinized the Buddha's body for the thirty-two marks of a
great man.

He saw all of them except for two, which he had doubts about: whether
the private parts are covered in a foreskin, and the largeness of the
tongue.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "Sela sees all the marks except for two,
which he has doubts about: whether the private parts are covered in a
foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue."

The Buddha used his psychic power to will that Sela would see his
private parts covered in a foreskin. And he stuck out his tongue and
stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his
entire forehead with his tongue.

Then Sela thought, "The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks
completely, lacking none. But I don't know whether or not he is an
awakened
one.[1665](endnotes.xhtml_note-1665){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1665
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I have heard that brahmins of the past who
were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said, 'Those who are
perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas reveal themselves when
praised.'[1666](endnotes.xhtml_note-1666){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1666
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I extoll him in his presence with
fitting verses?"

Then Sela extolled the Buddha in his presence with fitting verses:

> "O Blessed One, your body's
> perfect,[1667](endnotes.xhtml_note-1667){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1667
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> you're radiant, handsome, lovely to behold;\
> golden colored,\
> with teeth so white; you're strong.
>
> The characteristics\
> of a handsome man,\
> the marks of a great man,\
> are all found on your body.
>
> Your eyes are clear, your face is fair,\
> you're formidable, upright, majestic.\
> In the midst of the Saṅgha of ascetics,\
> you shine like the sun.
>
> You're a mendicant fine to see,\
> with skin that shines like lustrous gold.\
> But with such excellent appearance,\
> what do you want with the ascetic life?
>
> You're fit to be a king,\
> a wheel-turning monarch, chief of charioteers,\
> victorious in the four quarters,\
> lord of the Black Plum Tree Land.
>
> Aristocrats, nobles, and kings\
> ought follow your rule.\
> Gotama, may you reign\
> as king of kings, lord of men!"
>
> "I am a king, Sela,\
> the supreme king of the teaching.\
> By the teaching I roll forth the wheel\
> which cannot be rolled
> back."[1668](endnotes.xhtml_note-1668){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1668
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> "You claim to be awakened,\
> the supreme king of the teaching.\
> 'I roll forth the teaching':\
> so you say, Gotama.
>
> Then who is your
> general,[1669](endnotes.xhtml_note-1669){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1669
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the disciple who follows the Teacher's way?\
> Who keeps rolling the wheel\
> of teaching you rolled forth?"
>
> "By me the wheel was rolled forth,"\
> [said the Buddha, ]{.speaker}\
> "the supreme wheel of teaching.\
> Sāriputta, taking after the Realized One,\
> keeps it rolling
> on.[1670](endnotes.xhtml_note-1670){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1670
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> I have known what should be
> known,[1671](endnotes.xhtml_note-1671){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1671
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and developed what should be developed,\
> and given up what should be given up:\
> and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha.
>
> Dispel your doubt in me---\
> make up your mind, brahmin!\
> The sight of a Buddha\
> is hard to find
> again.[1672](endnotes.xhtml_note-1672){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1672
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> I am a Buddha, brahmin,\
> the supreme surgeon,\
> one of those whose appearance in the world\
> is hard to find again.
>
> A manifestation of divinity, unequaled,\
> crusher of Māra's army;\
> having subdued all my opponents,\
> I rejoice, fearing nothing from any quarter."
>
> "Pay heed, sirs, to what\
> is spoken by the Clear-eyed One.\
> The surgeon, the great hero,\
> roars like a lion in the jungle.
>
> Holy, unequaled,\
> crusher of Māra's army;\
> who would not be inspired by him,\
> even one born in a dark
> class?[1673](endnotes.xhtml_note-1673){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1673
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Those who wish may follow me;\
> those who don't may go.\
> Right here, I'll go forth in his presence,\
> the one of such splendid wisdom."
>
> "Sir, if you endorse\
> the teaching of the Buddha,\
> we'll also go forth in his presence,\
> the one of such splendid wisdom."
>
> "These three hundred brahmins\
> with joined palms held up, ask:\
> 'May we lead the spiritual life\
> in your presence, Blessed One?'"
>
> "The spiritual life is well explained,"\
> [said the Buddha, ]{.speaker}\
> "apparent in the present life, immediately effective.\
> Here the going forth isn't in vain\
> for one who trains with diligence."

And the brahmin Sela together with his assembly received the going
forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence.

And when the night had passed Keṇiya had delicious fresh and cooked
foods prepared in his own hermitage. Then he had the Buddha informed of
the time, saying, "It's time, Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to Keṇiya's hermitage, where he sat on the seat spread out,
together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Then Keṇiya served and satisfied
the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with
delicious fresh and cooked foods. When the Buddha had eaten and washed
his hand and bowl, Keṇiya took a low seat and sat to one side. The
Buddha expressed his appreciation with these verses:

> "The foremost of sacrifices `<j>`{=html}is the offering to the sacred
> flame;[1674](endnotes.xhtml_note-1674){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1674
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> the Sāvitrī Mantra is the foremost of poetic
> meters;[1675](endnotes.xhtml_note-1675){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1675
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> of humans, the king is the foremost;\
> the ocean's the foremost of rivers;
>
> the foremost of stars is the moon;\
> the sun is the foremost of lights;\
> for those who sacrifice seeking merit,\
> the Saṅgha is the foremost."

When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Keṇiya the matted-hair
ascetic with these verses, he got up from his seat and left.

Then Venerable Sela and his assembly, living alone, withdrawn, diligent,
keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path
in this very life. They lived having achieved with their own insight the
goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.

They understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Sela together with his assembly became
perfected.

Then Sela with his assembly went to see the Buddha. He arranged his robe
over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

> "This is the eighth day since\
> we went for refuge, O Clear-eyed One.\
> In these seven days, Blessed One,\
> we've become tamed in your teaching.
>
> You are the Buddha, you are the
> Teacher,[1676](endnotes.xhtml_note-1676){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1676
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> you are the sage who has overcome Māra;\
> you have cut off the underlying tendencies,\
> you've crossed over, and you bring humanity across.
>
> You have transcended attachments,\
> your defilements are shattered;\
> by not grasping, like a lion,\
> you've given up fear and dread.
>
> These three hundred mendicants\
> stand with joined palms raised.\
> Stretch out your feet, great hero:\
> let these giants bow to the Teacher."

</article>
<article id="mn93">

### [MN 93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Assalāyana ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assalāyanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1677](endnotes.xhtml_note-1677){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1677
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time around five hundred brahmins from abroad were residing
in Sāvatthī on some
business.[1678](endnotes.xhtml_note-1678){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1678
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then those brahmins thought, "This ascetic
Gotama advocates purification for all four classes. Who is capable of
debating with him about this?"

Now at that time the brahmin student Assalāyana was residing in
Sāvatthī. He was young, tonsured, and sixteen years old. He had mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well
versed in cosmology and the marks of a great
man.[1679](endnotes.xhtml_note-1679){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1679
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then those brahmins thought, "This Assalāyana is capable of debating
with the ascetic Gotama about
this."[1680](endnotes.xhtml_note-1680){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1680
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So they approached Assalāyana and said to him, "This ascetic Gotama
advocates purification for all four classes. Please, Mister Assalāyana,
debate with the ascetic Gotama about this."

When they said this, Assalāyana said to them, "They say that the ascetic
Gotama is a speaker of principle. But speakers of principle are hard to
debate. I'm not capable of debating with the ascetic Gotama about
this."[1681](endnotes.xhtml_note-1681){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1681
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time, those brahmins said to him "This ascetic Gotama
advocates purification for all four classes. Please, Mister Assalāyana,
debate with the ascetic Gotama about this. For you have lived as a
wanderer."[1682](endnotes.xhtml_note-1682){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1682
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And for a second time, Assalāyana refused.

For a third time, those brahmins said to him, "This ascetic Gotama
advocates purification for all four classes. Please, Mister Assalāyana,
debate with the ascetic Gotama about this. For you have lived as a
wanderer. Don't admit defeat before going into battle!"

When they said this, Assalāyana said to them, "Clearly, good sirs, I'm
not getting through to you when I say: 'They say that the ascetic Gotama
is a speaker of principle. But speakers of principle are hard to debate.
I'm not capable of debating with the ascetic Gotama about this.'
Nevertheless, I shall go at your bidding."

Then Assalāyana together with a large group of brahmins went to the
Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins say: 'Only brahmins are the best class;
other classes are
inferior.[1683](endnotes.xhtml_note-1683){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1683
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are the light class; other
classes are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not others. Only brahmins
are Brahmā's true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of Brahmā,
created by Brahmā, heirs of Brahmā.' What do you say about this?"

"But Assalāyana, brahmin women are seen menstruating, being pregnant,
giving birth, and breastfeeding. Yet even though they're born from a
brahmin womb they say: 'Only brahmins are the best class; other classes
are inferior. Only brahmins are the light class; other classes are dark.
Only brahmins are purified, not others. Only brahmins are Brahmā's
true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by Brahmā,
heirs of Brahmā.'"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Have you heard that in Greece and Persia
and other foreign lands there are only two classes, masters and bonded
servants; and that masters may become servants, and servants
masters?"[1684](endnotes.xhtml_note-1684){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1684
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, I have heard that."

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose an aristocrat were to kill
living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct; to use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and to be covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they'd be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Would this happen only to an aristocrat, and not to a brahmin? Or
suppose a peasant, or a menial were to act in the same way. Would that
result befall only a peasant or a menial, and not to a brahmin?"

"No, Mister Gotama. If they acted the same way, the same result would
befall an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant, or a menial. For if any of
the four classes were to kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual
misconduct; to use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical;
and to be covetous, malicious, with wrong view, then, when their body
breaks up, after death, they'd be reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell."

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose a brahmin were to refrain from
killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual misconduct;
from using speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and
from covetousness, malice, and wrong view. When their body breaks up,
after death, they'd be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. Would
this happen only to a brahmin, and not to an aristocrat, a peasant, or a
menial?"

"No, Mister Gotama. If they acted the same way, the same result would
befall an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant, or a menial. For if any of
the four classes were to refrain from killing living creatures,
stealing, and committing sexual misconduct; from using speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and from covetousness, malice,
and wrong view, then, when their body breaks up, after death, they'd be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Is only a brahmin capable of developing
a heart of love, free of enmity and ill will for this region, and not an
aristocrat, peasant, or
menial?"[1685](endnotes.xhtml_note-1685){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1685
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama. Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials can all
do so. For all four classes are capable of developing a heart of love,
free of enmity and ill will for this region."

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Is only a brahmin capable of taking some
bathing cleanser, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt, and
not an aristocrat, peasant, or menial?"

"No, Mister Gotama. All four classes are capable of doing this."

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose an anointed aristocratic king
were to gather a hundred people of various births and say to
them:[1686](endnotes.xhtml_note-1686){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1686
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Please gentlemen, let anyone here who was
born in a family of aristocrats, brahmins, or chieftains take a
drill-stick made of teak, sal, frankincense wood, sandalwood, or cherry
wood, light a fire and produce
heat.[1687](endnotes.xhtml_note-1687){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1687
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And let anyone here who was born in a
family of corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or
scavengers take a drill-stick made from a dog's drinking trough, a pig's
trough, a dustbin, or castor-oil wood, light a fire and produce
heat.'[1688](endnotes.xhtml_note-1688){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1688
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, Assalāyana? Would only the fire produced by the high
class people with good quality wood have flames, color, and radiance,
and be usable as fire, and not the fire produced by the low class people
with poor quality wood?"

"No, Mister Gotama. The fire produced by the high class people with good
quality wood would have flames, color, and radiance, and be usable as
fire, and so would the fire produced by the low class people with poor
quality wood. For all fire has flames, color, and radiance, and is
usable as
fire."[1689](endnotes.xhtml_note-1689){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1689
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Then what is the source of the brahmins' certainty and forcefulness in
this matter that they make this claim?"

"Even though you say this, still the brahmins maintain their belief."

"What do you think,
Assalāyana?[1690](endnotes.xhtml_note-1690){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1690
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose an aristocrat boy was to sleep with
a brahmin girl, and they had a
child.[1691](endnotes.xhtml_note-1691){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1691
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Would that child be called an aristocrat
after the father or a brahmin after the mother?"

"They could be called either."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose a brahmin boy was to sleep with
an aristocrat girl, and they had a
child.[1692](endnotes.xhtml_note-1692){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1692
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Would that child be called an aristocrat
after the mother or a brahmin after the father?"

"They could be called either."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose a mare were to mate with a
donkey, and she gave birth to a mule. Would that mule be called a horse
after the mother or a donkey after the father?"

"It's a mule, as it is a crossbreed. I see the difference in this case,
but not in the previous cases."

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose there were two brahmin students
who were brothers who had shared a womb. One was an educated reciter,
while the other was not an educated
reciter.[1693](endnotes.xhtml_note-1693){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1693
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Who would the brahmins feed first at an
offering of food for ancestors, an offering of a dish of milk-rice, a
sacrifice, or a feast for guests?"

"They'd first feed the student who was an educated reciter. For how
could an offering to someone who is not an educated reciter be very
fruitful?"

"What do you think, Assalāyana? Suppose there were two brahmin students
who were brothers who had shared a womb. One was an educated reciter,
but was unethical, of bad character, while the other was not an educated
reciter, but was ethical and of good character. Who would the brahmins
feed first?"

"They'd first feed the student who was not an educated reciter, but was
ethical and of good character. For how could an offering to someone who
is unethical and of bad character be very fruitful?"

"Firstly you relied on birth, Assalāyana, then you switched to
education, then you switched to abstemious
behavior.[1694](endnotes.xhtml_note-1694){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1694
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now you've come around to believing in
purification for the four classes, just as I advocate." When he said
this, Assalāyana sat silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast,
depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him:

"Once upon a time, Assalāyana, seven brahmin seers settled in leaf huts
in a wilderness region. They had the following harmful
misconception:[1695](endnotes.xhtml_note-1695){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1695
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Only brahmins are the best class; other
classes are inferior. Only brahmins are the light class; other classes
are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not
others.[1696](endnotes.xhtml_note-1696){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1696
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Only brahmins are Brahmā's true-born sons,
born from his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by Brahmā, heirs of
Brahmā.'

The seer Devala the Dark heard about
this.[1697](endnotes.xhtml_note-1697){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1697
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So he did up his hair and beard, dressed in
magenta robes, put on his boots, grasped a golden staff, and appeared in
the courtyard of the seven brahmin
seers.[1698](endnotes.xhtml_note-1698){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1698
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he wandered about the yard saying,
'Where, oh where have those brahmin seers gone? Where, oh where have
those brahmin seers gone?'

Then those brahmin seers said, 'Who's this wandering about our courtyard
like a village lout? Let's curse him!'

So they cursed Devala the Dark, 'Be ashes, lowlife! Be ashes, lowlife!'
But the more the seers cursed him, the more attractive, good-looking,
and lovely Devala the Dark
became.[1699](endnotes.xhtml_note-1699){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1699
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then those brahmin seers said, 'Our fervor is in vain! Our spiritual
path is fruitless! For when we used to curse someone to become ashes,
ashes they became. But the more we curse this one, the more attractive,
good-looking, and lovely he becomes.'

'Gentlemen, your fervor is not in vain; your spiritual path is not
fruitless. Please let go of your malevolence towards me.'

'We let go of our malevolence towards you. But who are you, sir?'

'Have you heard of the seer Devala the Dark?'

'Yes, sir.'

'I am he, sirs.' Then they approached Devala and bowed to him.

Devala said to them, 'I heard that when the seven brahmin seers had
settled in leaf huts in a wilderness region, they had the following
harmful
misconception:[1700](endnotes.xhtml_note-1700){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1700
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Only brahmins are the best class; other
classes are inferior. Only brahmins are the light class; other classes
are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not others. Only brahmins are
Brahmā's true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by
Brahmā, heirs of Brahmā."'

'That's right, sir.'

'But do you know whether your birth mother only had relations with a
brahmin and not with a non-brahmin?'

'We don't know that.'

'But do you know whether your birth mother's mothers back to the seventh
generation only had relations with brahmins and not with non-brahmins?'

'We don't know that.'

'But do you know whether your birth father only had relations with a
brahmin woman and not with a non-brahmin?'

'We don't know that.'

'But do you know whether your birth father's fathers back to the seventh
generation only had relations with brahmins and not with non-brahmins?'

'We don't know that.'

'But do you know how an embryo is conceived?'

'We do know that, sir. An embryo is conceived when these three things
come together---the mother and father come together, the mother is in
the fertile phase of her menstrual cycle, and the virile spirit is
ready.'[1701](endnotes.xhtml_note-1701){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1701
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'But do you know for sure whether that virile spirit is an aristocrat, a
brahmin, a peasant, or a
menial?'[1702](endnotes.xhtml_note-1702){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1702
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'We don't know that.'

'In that case, sirs, don't you know what you are?'

'In that case, sir, we don't know what we are.'

Given that even those seven brahmin seers could not prevail when
pursued, pressed, and grilled by the seer Devala on their own
genealogy,[1703](endnotes.xhtml_note-1703){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1703
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} how could you prevail now being grilled by
me on your own genealogy when you and your tradition do not so much as
pick up the last
spoonful?"[1704](endnotes.xhtml_note-1704){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1704
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Assalāyana said to him, "Excellent, Mister Gotama!
... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower
who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn94">

### [MN 94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ghoṭamukha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ghoṭamukhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1705](endnotes.xhtml_note-1705){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1705
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Udena was
staying near Varanasi in the Khemiya Mango
Grove.[1706](endnotes.xhtml_note-1706){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1706
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Ghoṭamukha had arrived at Varanasi on some
business.[1707](endnotes.xhtml_note-1707){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1707
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then as he was going for a walk he went to
the Khemiya Mango Grove. At that time Venerable Udena was walking
mindfully in the open air. Ghoṭamukha approached and exchanged greetings
with him.

Walking alongside Udena, he said, "Mister ascetic, there is no such
thing as a principled renunciate
life;[1708](endnotes.xhtml_note-1708){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1708
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that's what I think. Yet I have not seen
honorable ones such as yourself, or a relevant teaching."

When he said this, Udena stepped down from the walking path, entered his
dwelling, and sat down on the seat spread
out.[1709](endnotes.xhtml_note-1709){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1709
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ghoṭamukha also stepped down from the
walking path and entered the dwelling, where he stood to one side. Udena
said to him, "There are seats, brahmin. Please sit if you wish."

"I was just waiting for you to sit down. For how could one such as I
presume to sit first without being invited?"

Then he took a low seat and sat to one side, where he said, "Mister
ascetic, there is no such thing as a principled renunciate life; that's
what I think. Yet I have not seen honorable ones such as yourself, or a
relevant teaching."

"Brahmin, we can discuss this. But only if you allow what should be
allowed, and reject what should be rejected. And if you ask me the
meaning of anything you don't understand,
saying:[1710](endnotes.xhtml_note-1710){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1710
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sir, why is this? What does that mean?'"

"Let us discuss this. I will do as you say."

"Brahmin, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
    mortifying themselves.
2.  One person mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying
    others.
3.  One person mortifies themselves and others, committed to the
    practice of mortifying themselves and others.
4.  One person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, committed to
    the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. They live
    without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing
    bliss, with self become divine.

Which one of these four people do you like the sound of?"

"Sir, I don't like the sound of the first three people. I only like the
sound of the last person, who doesn't mortify either themselves or
others."

"But why don't you like the sound of those three people?"

"Sir, the person who mortifies themselves does so even though they want
to be happy and recoil from pain. That's why I don't like the sound of
that person. The person who mortifies others does so even though others
want to be happy and recoil from pain. That's why I don't like the sound
of that person. The person who mortifies themselves and others does so
even though both themselves and others want to be happy and recoil from
pain. That's why I don't like the sound of that person. The person who
doesn't mortify either themselves or others---living without wishes,
quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine---does not
torment themselves or others, both of whom want to be happy and recoil
from pain. That's why I like the sound of that person."

"There are, brahmin, these two groups of people. What two? There's one
group of people who, being obsessed with jeweled earrings, seeks
partners and children, male and female bondservants, fields and lands,
and gold and currency.

And there's another group of people who, not being obsessed with jeweled
earrings, has given up partner and children, male and female
bondservants, fields and lands, and gold and currency, and goes forth
from the lay life to homelessness.

Now, brahmin, that person who doesn't mortify either themselves or
others---in which of these two groups of people do you usually find such
a person?"

"I usually find such a person in the group that has gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness."

"Just now I understood you to say: 'Mister ascetic, there is no such
thing as a principled renunciate life; that's what I think. Yet I have
not seen honorable ones such as yourself, or a relevant teaching."

"Well, I obviously had my reasons for saying that, master
Udena.[1711](endnotes.xhtml_note-1711){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1711
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But there is such a thing as a principled
renunciate life. That's what I think, and that's how you should remember
me. Now, these four people that you've spoken of in a brief summary:
please explain them to me in detail, out of sympathy."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Ghoṭamukha. Udena said this:

"What person mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of
mortifying
themselves?[1712](endnotes.xhtml_note-1712){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1712
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a person goes naked, ignoring
conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called.
They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on their
behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything from a
pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a
shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a
woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or
where there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or
meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for
alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to
seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They're devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening. And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of
mortifying and tormenting the body. This is called a person who
mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying
themselves.

And what person mortifies others, committed to the practice of
mortifying others? It's when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a
butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. This is
called a person who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of
mortifying others.

And what person mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves and others? It's when a person is an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new
ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair
and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with
ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the hall with
his chief queen and the brahmin high priest. There he lies on the bare
ground strewn with grass. The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a
cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk
from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the
third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is served to the sacred flame.
The calf feeds on the remainder. He says: 'Slaughter this many bulls,
bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this
many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!' His
bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of
punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces. This is called a
person who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves and others.

And what person doesn't mortify either themselves or others, committed
to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, living without
wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with
self become divine?

It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One, and
reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. Once
they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving.

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of sex.

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and trustworthy, and don't trick the world with their words.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They avoid injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They avoid
seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They avoid beautifying and
adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. They avoid
high and luxurious beds. They avoid receiving gold and currency, raw
grains, raw meat, women and girls, male and female bondservants, goats
and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and
fields and land. They avoid running errands and messages; buying and
selling; falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud,
cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry,
plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they
have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss
inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving
up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it connected.

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.'

Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness,
they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or
pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act
out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose
to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is called a person who neither mortifies themselves or others,
being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others.
They live without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

When he had spoken, Ghoṭamukha said to him, "Excellent, Mister Udena!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Udena has
made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Udena,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may
Mister Udena remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

"Brahmin, don't go for refuge to
me.[1713](endnotes.xhtml_note-1713){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1713
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should go for refuge to that same
Blessed One to whom I have gone for refuge."

"But Mister Udena, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha?"

"Brahmin, the Buddha has already become fully quenched."

"Mister Udena, if I heard that the Buddha was within ten leagues, or
twenty, or even up to a hundred leagues away, I'd go a hundred leagues
to see him.

But since the Buddha has become fully quenched, I go for refuge to that
fully quenched Buddha, to the teaching, and to the Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may Mister Udena remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life. Mister Udena, the king of Aṅga gives me a regular daily
allowance. I will give you one portion of
that."[1714](endnotes.xhtml_note-1714){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1714
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But brahmin, what does the king of Aṅga give you as a regular daily
allowance?"

"Five hundred
dollars."[1715](endnotes.xhtml_note-1715){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1715
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's not proper for us to receive gold and currency."

"If that's not proper, I will have a dwelling built for Mister
Udena."[1716](endnotes.xhtml_note-1716){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1716
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"If you want to build me a dwelling, then build an assembly hall for the
Saṅgha at
Pāṭaliputta."[1717](endnotes.xhtml_note-1717){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1717
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Now I'm even more delighted and satisfied with Mister Udena, since he
encourages me to give to the Saṅgha. So with this allowance and another
one I will have an assembly hall built for the Saṅgha at Pāṭaliputta."

And so he had that hall built. And these days it's called the
"Ghoṭamukhī".

</article>
<article id="mn95">

### [MN 95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Caṅkī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Caṅkīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Opāsāda.[1718](endnotes.xhtml_note-1718){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1718
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He stayed in the Godswood of sal trees to
the north of
Opāsāda.[1719](endnotes.xhtml_note-1719){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1719
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the brahmin Caṅkī was living in Opāsāda. It was a crown
property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala, teeming with living
creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park endowed to
a
brahmin.[1720](endnotes.xhtml_note-1720){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1720
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Opāsāda heard: "It seems the ascetic
Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---has arrived at
Opāsāda together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. He is staying in the
Godswood to the north. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then, having departed Opāsāda, they formed into companies and headed
north to the Godswood.

Now at that time the brahmin Caṅkī had retired to the upper floor of his
stilt longhouse for his midday
nap.[1721](endnotes.xhtml_note-1721){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1721
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He saw the brahmins and householders
heading for the Godswood, and addressed his
butler,[1722](endnotes.xhtml_note-1722){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1722
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "My butler, why are the brahmins and
householders heading north for the Godswood?"

"The ascetic Gotama has arrived at Opāsāda together with a large Saṅgha
of mendicants. He is staying in the Godswood to the north. He has this
good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the
world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and
humans, awakened, blessed.' They're going to see that Mister Gotama."

"Well then, go to the brahmins and householders and say to them: 'Sirs,
the brahmin Caṅkī asks you to wait, as he will also go to see the
ascetic Gotama.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

Now at that time around five hundred brahmins from abroad were residing
in Opāsāda on some business. They heard that the brahmin Caṅkī was going
to see the ascetic Gotama. They approached Caṅkī and said to him, "Is it
really true that you are going to see the ascetic Gotama?"

"Yes, gentlemen, it is true."

"Please don't! It's not appropriate for you to go to see the ascetic
Gotama;[1723](endnotes.xhtml_note-1723){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1723
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} it's appropriate that he comes to see you.

You are well born on both your mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal
generation.[1724](endnotes.xhtml_note-1724){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1724
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For this reason it's not appropriate for
you to go to see the ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to
see you.

You're rich, affluent, and wealthy. ...

You recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered the three Vedas,
together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology
and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. You know them
word-by-word, and their grammar. He are well versed in cosmology and the
marks of a great man. ...

You are attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. You are
magnificent and splendid as Brahmā, remarkable to behold.
...[1725](endnotes.xhtml_note-1725){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1725
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

You are ethical, mature in ethical conduct. ...

You're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

You teach the tutors of many, and teach three hundred students to recite
the hymns.
...[1726](endnotes.xhtml_note-1726){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1726
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

You're honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King
Pasenadi of Kosala and the brahmin Pokkharasāti. ...

You live in Opāsāda, a crown property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala,
teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a
royal park endowed to a brahmin.

For all these reasons it's not appropriate for you to go to see the
ascetic Gotama; it's appropriate that he comes to see you."

When they had spoken, Caṅkī said to those brahmins:

"Well then, gentlemen, listen to why it's appropriate for me to go to
see the ascetic Gotama, and it's not appropriate for him to come to see
me.

He is well born on both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal
generation. For this reason it's not appropriate for the ascetic Gotama
to come to see me; rather, it's appropriate for me to go to see him.

When he went forth he abandoned abundant gold, both coined and uncoined,
stored in dungeons and towers. ...

He went forth from the lay life to homelessness while still a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life. ...

Though his mother and father wished otherwise, weeping with tearful
faces, he shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and
went forth from the lay life to homelessness. ...

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. He is
magnificent and splendid as Brahmā, remarkable to behold. ...

He is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is noble and skillful.
...

He's a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that
expresses the meaning. ...

He's a tutor of tutors. ...

He has ended sensual desire, and is rid of caprice. ...

He teaches the efficacy of deeds and action. He doesn't wish any harm
upon the community of brahmins. ...

He went forth from an eminent family of unbroken aristocratic lineage.
...

He went forth from a rich, affluent, and wealthy family. ...

People come from distant lands and distant countries to question him.
...[1727](endnotes.xhtml_note-1727){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1727
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Many thousands of deities have gone for refuge for life to him. ...

He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' ...

He has the thirty-two marks of a great man. ...

King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha and his wives and children have gone
for refuge for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[1728](endnotes.xhtml_note-1728){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1728
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

King Pasenadi of Kosala and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[1729](endnotes.xhtml_note-1729){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1729
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmin Pokkharasāti and his wives and children have gone for refuge
for life to the ascetic Gotama.
...[1730](endnotes.xhtml_note-1730){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1730
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The ascetic Gotama has arrived to stay in the Godswood to the north of
Opāsāda. Any ascetic or brahmin who comes to stay in our village
district is our guest, and should be honored and respected as such. For
this reason, too, it's not appropriate for Mister Gotama to come to see
me, rather, it's appropriate for me to go to see him.

This is the extent of Mister Gotama's praise that I have memorized. But
his praises are not confined to this, for the praise of Mister Gotama is
limitless. The possession of even a single one of these factors makes it
inappropriate for Mister Gotama to come to see me, rather, it's
appropriate for me to go to see him. Well then, gentlemen, let's all go
to see the ascetic Gotama."

Then Caṅkī together with a large group of brahmins went to the Buddha
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side.

Now at that time the Buddha was sitting engaged in some polite
conversation together with some very senior brahmins. And the brahmin
student Kāpaṭika was sitting in that assembly. He was young, tonsured,
and sixteen years old. He had mastered the three Vedas, together with
their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knew them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He was well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great
man.[1731](endnotes.xhtml_note-1731){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1731
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} While the senior brahmins were conversing
together with the Buddha, he interrupted.

Then the Buddha rebuked Kāpaṭika, "Venerable Bhāradvāja, don't interrupt
the senior
brahmins.[1732](endnotes.xhtml_note-1732){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1732
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Wait until they've finished speaking."

When he had spoken, Caṅkī said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, don't
rebuke the student Kāpaṭika. He's a gentleman, learned, astute, a good
speaker. He is capable of debating with Mister Gotama about this."

Then it occurred to the
Buddha,[1733](endnotes.xhtml_note-1733){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1733
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Clearly the student Kāpaṭika will talk
about the scriptural heritage of the three Vedas. That's why the
brahmins put him at the front."

Then Kāpaṭika thought, "When the ascetic Gotama looks at me, I'll ask
him a question." Then the Buddha, knowing Kāpaṭika's train of thought,
looked at him.

Then Kāpaṭika thought, "The ascetic Gotama is engaging with me. Why
don't I ask him a question?" Then he said, "Mister Gotama, regarding
that which by the lineage of testament and by canonical authority is the
ancient hymnal of the brahmins, the brahmins come to the categorical
conclusion:[1734](endnotes.xhtml_note-1734){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1734
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is the only truth, anything else is
futile.' What do you say about this?"

"Well, Bhāradvāja, is there even a single one of the brahmins who says
this:[1735](endnotes.xhtml_note-1735){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1735
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I know this, I see this: this is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, is there even a single tutor of the brahmins, or a tutors' tutor,
or anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors, who says
this:[1736](endnotes.xhtml_note-1736){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1736
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I know this, I see this: this is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, what of the ancient seers of the brahmins, namely Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha,
Kassapa, and Bhagu? They were the authors and propagators of the hymns.
Their hymnal was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient times; and
these days, brahmins continue to sing and chant it, chanting what was
chanted and teaching what was
taught.[1737](endnotes.xhtml_note-1737){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1737
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Did even they say: 'We know this, we see
this: this is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So, Bhāradvāja, it seems that there is not a single one of the
brahmins, not even anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors, nor
even the ancient seers of the brahmins who say: 'We know this, we see
this: this is the only truth, anything else is futile.'

Suppose there was a queue of blind men, each holding the one in front:
the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last
one does not
see.[1738](endnotes.xhtml_note-1738){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1738
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, it seems to me that the
brahmins' statement turns out to be like a queue of blind men: the first
one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not
see. What do you think, Bhāradvāja? This being so, doesn't the brahmins'
faith turn out to be baseless?"

"The brahmins don't just honor this because of faith, but also because
of oral
transmission."[1739](endnotes.xhtml_note-1739){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1739
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"First you relied on faith, now you speak of oral transmission. These
five things can be seen to turn out in two different ways. What five?
Faith, endorsement, oral transmission, reasoned train of thought, and
acceptance of a view after
deliberation.[1740](endnotes.xhtml_note-1740){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1740
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Even though you have full faith in
something, it may be vacuous, hollow, and false. And even if you don't
have full faith in something, it may be true and real, not otherwise.
Even though you fully endorse something
...[1741](endnotes.xhtml_note-1741){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1741
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} something may be well transmitted ...
something may be well thought out ... something may be well deliberated,
it may be vacuous, hollow, and false. And even if something is not well
deliberated, it may be true and real, not otherwise. For a sensible
person who is preserving truth this is not sufficient to come to the
categorical
conclusion:[1742](endnotes.xhtml_note-1742){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1742
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is the only truth, anything else is
futile.'"

"But Mister Gotama, how do you define the preservation of truth?"

"If a person has faith, they preserve truth by saying, 'Such is my
faith.' But they don't yet come to the categorical conclusion: 'This is
the only truth, anything else is futile.' If a person has a belief ...
or has received an oral transmission ... or has a reasoned reflection
about something ... or has accepted a view after contemplation, they
preserve truth by saying, 'Such is the view I have accepted after
contemplation.' But they don't yet come to the categorical conclusion:
'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' That's how the
preservation of truth is defined, Bhāradvāja. I describe the
preservation of truth as defined in this
way.[1743](endnotes.xhtml_note-1743){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1743
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But this is not yet the awakening to the
truth."

"That's how the preservation of truth is defined, Mister Gotama. We
regard the preservation of truth as defined in this way. But Mister
Gotama, how do you define awakening to the truth?"

"Bhāradvāja, take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or
village. A householder or their child approaches and scrutinizes them
for three kinds of things: things that arouse greed, things that provoke
hate, and things that promote
delusion.[1744](endnotes.xhtml_note-1744){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1744
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Does this venerable have any qualities
that arouse greed? Such qualities that, were their mind to be
overwhelmed by them, they might say that they know, even though they
don't know, or that they see, even though they don't see; or that they
might encourage others to do what is for their lasting harm and
suffering?' Scrutinizing them they find: 'This venerable has no such
qualities that arouse greed. Rather, that venerable has bodily and
verbal behavior like that of someone without greed. And the principle
that they teach is deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful,
sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the
astute. It's not easy for someone with greed to teach this.'

Scrutinizing them in this way they see that they are purified of
qualities that arouse greed. Next, they search them for qualities that
provoke hate. 'Does this venerable have any qualities that provoke hate?
Such qualities that, were their mind to be overwhelmed by them, they
might say that they know, even though they don't know, or that they see,
even though they don't see; or that they might encourage others to do
what is for their lasting harm and suffering?' Scrutinizing them they
find: 'This venerable has no such qualities that provoke hate. Rather,
that venerable has bodily and verbal behavior like that of someone
without hate. And the principle that they teach is deep, hard to see,
hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic,
subtle, comprehensible to the astute. It's not easy for someone with
hate to teach this.'

Scrutinizing them in this way they see that they are purified of
qualities that provoke hate. Next, they scrutinize them for qualities
that promote delusion. 'Does this venerable have any qualities that
promote delusion? Such qualities that, were their mind to be overwhelmed
by them, they might say that they know, even though they don't know, or
that they see, even though they don't see; or that they might encourage
others to do what is for their lasting harm and suffering?' Scrutinizing
them they find: 'This venerable has no such qualities that promote
delusion. Rather, that venerable has bodily and verbal behavior like
that of someone without delusion. And the principle that they teach is
deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the
scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute. It's not easy for
someone with delusion to teach this.'

Scrutinizing them in this way they see that they are purified of
qualities that promote delusion. Next, they place faith in them. When
faith has arisen they approach the teacher. They pay homage, actively
listen, hear the teachings, remember the teachings, reflect on their
meaning, and accept them after deliberation. Then enthusiasm springs up;
they apply zeal, weigh up, and strive. Striving, they directly realize
the ultimate truth, and see it with penetrating
wisdom.[1745](endnotes.xhtml_note-1745){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1745
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how the awakening to truth is
defined, Bhāradvāja. I describe the awakening to truth as defined in
this way. But this is not yet the attainment of truth."

"That's how the awakening to truth is defined, Mister Gotama. I regard
the awakening to truth as defined in this way. But Mister Gotama, how do
you define the attainment of truth?"

"By the cultivation, development, and making much of these very same
things there is the attainment of
truth.[1746](endnotes.xhtml_note-1746){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1746
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how the attainment of truth is
defined, Bhāradvāja. I describe the attainment of truth as defined in
this way."

"That's how the attainment of truth is defined, Mister Gotama. I regard
the attainment of truth as defined in this way. But what quality is
helpful for arriving at the truth?"

"Striving is helpful for arriving at the truth. If you don't strive, you
won't arrive at the truth. You arrive at the truth because you strive.
That's why striving is helpful for arriving at the truth."

"But what quality is helpful for striving?"

"Weighing up the teachings is helpful for striving
...[1747](endnotes.xhtml_note-1747){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1747
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Zeal is helpful for weighing up the teachings
...[1748](endnotes.xhtml_note-1748){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1748
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Enthusiasm is helpful for zeal ...

Acceptance of the teachings after deliberation is helpful for enthusiasm
...

Reflecting on the meaning of the teachings is helpful for accepting them
after deliberation ...

Remembering the teachings is helpful for reflecting on their meaning ...

Hearing the teachings is helpful for remembering the teachings ...

Active listening is helpful for hearing the teachings ...

Paying homage is helpful for active listening ...

Approaching is helpful for paying homage ...

Faith is helpful for approaching a teacher. If you don't give rise to
faith, you won't approach a teacher. You approach a teacher because you
have faith. That's why faith is helpful for approaching a teacher."

"I've asked Mister Gotama about the preservation of truth, and he has
answered me. I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it. I've
asked Mister Gotama about awakening to the truth, and he has answered
me. I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it. I've asked
Mister Gotama about the attainment of truth, and he has answered me. I
endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it. I've asked Mister
Gotama about the things that are helpful for the attainment of truth,
and he has answered me. I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with
it. Whatever I have asked Mister Gotama about he has answered me. I
endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it.

Mister Gotama, I used to think this: 'Who are these shavelings, fake
ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our kinsman next to
those who understand the teaching?' The Buddha has inspired me to have
love, confidence, and respect for ascetics!

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."[1749](endnotes.xhtml_note-1749){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1749
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn96">

### [MN 96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Esukārī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Esukārīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Esukārī the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with
him.[1750](endnotes.xhtml_note-1750){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1750
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four kinds of
service:[1751](endnotes.xhtml_note-1751){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1751
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} for a brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant,
and a menial. This is the service they prescribe for a brahmin: 'A
brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial may all serve a
brahmin.'[1752](endnotes.xhtml_note-1752){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1752
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the service they prescribe for an
aristocrat: 'An aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial may all serve an
aristocrat.' This is the service they prescribe for a peasant: 'A
peasant or a menial may serve a peasant.' This is the service they
prescribe for a menial: 'Only a menial may serve a menial. For who else
will serve a menial?' These are the four kinds of service that the
brahmins prescribe. What do you say about this?"

"But brahmin, did the whole world authorize the brahmins to prescribe
these four kinds of service?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"It's as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person,
telling them, 'Eat this meat and pay for it!' In the same way, the
brahmins have prescribed these four kinds of service without the consent
of those ascetics and
brahmins.[1753](endnotes.xhtml_note-1753){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1753
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Brahmin, I don't say that you should serve everyone, nor do I say that
you shouldn't serve anyone. I say that you shouldn't serve someone if
serving them makes you worse, not better. And I say that you should
serve someone if serving them makes you better, not worse.

If they were to ask an aristocrat this, 'Who should you serve? Someone
in whose service you get worse, or someone in whose service you get
better?' Answering rightly, an aristocrat would say, 'Someone in whose
service I get better.'

If they were to ask a brahmin ... a peasant ... or a menial this, 'Who
should you serve? Someone in whose service you get worse, or someone in
whose service you get better?' Answering rightly, a menial would say,
'Someone in whose service I get better.'

Brahmin, I don't say that coming from an eminent family makes you a
better or worse person. I don't say that being very beautiful makes you
a better or worse
person.[1754](endnotes.xhtml_note-1754){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1754
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I don't say that being very wealthy makes
you a better or worse person.

For some people from eminent families kill living creatures, steal, and
commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. That's
why I don't say that coming from an eminent family makes you an even
truer person.

But some people from eminent families also refrain from killing living
creatures, stealing, and committing sexual misconduct. They refrain from
using speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
not covetous or malicious, and they have right view. That's why I don't
say that coming from an eminent family makes you a worse person.

People who are very beautiful, or not very beautiful, who are very
wealthy, or not very wealthy, may also behave in the same ways. That's
why I don't say that any of these things makes you a better or worse
person.

Brahmin, I don't say that you should serve everyone, nor do I say that
you shouldn't serve anyone. And I say that you should serve someone if
serving them makes you grow in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom. I say that you shouldn't serve someone if serving them doesn't
make you grow in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom."

When he had spoken, Esukārī said to him:

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four kinds of wealth: for a
brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant, and a
menial.[1755](endnotes.xhtml_note-1755){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1755
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The wealth they prescribe for a brahmin is
living on
alms.[1756](endnotes.xhtml_note-1756){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1756
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A brahmin who scorns his own wealth, living
on alms, fails in his duty like a guard who steals. The wealth they
prescribe for an aristocrat is the bow and
quiver.[1757](endnotes.xhtml_note-1757){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1757
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} An aristocrat who scorns his own wealth,
the bow and quiver, fails in his duty like a guard who steals. The
wealth they prescribe for a peasant is farming and animal
husbandry.[1758](endnotes.xhtml_note-1758){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1758
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A peasant who scorns his own wealth,
farming and animal husbandry, fails in his duty like a guard who steals.
The wealth they prescribe for a menial is the scythe and
flail.[1759](endnotes.xhtml_note-1759){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1759
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} A menial who scorns his own wealth, the
scythe and flail, fails in his duty like a guard who steals. These are
the four kinds of wealth that the brahmins prescribe. What do you say
about this?"

"But brahmin, did the whole world authorize the brahmins to prescribe
these four kinds of wealth?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"It's as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person,
telling them, 'Eat this meat and pay for it!'

In the same way, the brahmins have prescribed these four kinds of wealth
without the consent of these ascetics and brahmins.

I declare that a person's own wealth is the noble, transcendent
teaching.[1760](endnotes.xhtml_note-1760){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1760
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But they are reckoned by recollecting the
traditional family lineage of their mother and father wherever they are
incarnated. If they incarnate in a family of aristocrats they are
reckoned as an aristocrat. If they incarnate in a family of brahmins
they are reckoned as a brahmin. If they incarnate in a family of
peasants they are reckoned as a peasant. If they incarnate in a family
of menials they are reckoned as a menial.

It's like fire, which is reckoned according to the very same condition
dependent upon which it burns. A fire that burns dependent on logs is
reckoned as a log fire. A fire that burns dependent on twigs is reckoned
as a twig fire. A fire that burns dependent on grass is reckoned as a
grass fire. A fire that burns dependent on cow-dung is reckoned as a
cow-dung fire.

In the same way, I declare that a person's own wealth is the noble,
transcendent teaching. But they are reckoned by recollecting the
traditional family lineage of their mother and father wherever they are
incarnated.

Suppose someone from a family of aristocrats goes forth from the lay
life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by
the Realized One they refrain from killing living creatures, stealing,
and sex. They refrain from using speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical. And they're not covetous or malicious, and they have
right view. They succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

Suppose someone from a family of brahmins ... peasants ... menials goes
forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One ... they succeed in the system
of the skillful teaching.

What do you think, brahmin? Is only a brahmin capable of developing a
heart of love free of enmity and ill will for this region, and not an
aristocrat, peasant, or menial?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials can all
do so. For all four classes are capable of developing a heart of love
free of enmity and ill will for this region."

"In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,
brahmins, peasants, or menials goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One ... they succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

What do you think, brahmin? Is only a brahmin capable of taking some
bathing cleanser, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt, and
not an aristocrat, peasant, or
menial?"[1761](endnotes.xhtml_note-1761){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1761
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, Mister Gotama. All four classes are capable of doing this."

"In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,
brahmins, peasants, or menials goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One ... they succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

What do you think, brahmin? Suppose an anointed aristocratic king were
to gather a hundred people born in different classes and say to them:
'Please gentlemen, let anyone here who was born in a family of
aristocrats, brahmins, or chieftains take a drill-stick made of teak,
sal, frankincense wood, sandalwood, or cherry wood, light a fire and
produce heat. And let anyone here who was born in a family of
corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or scavengers
take a drill-stick made from a dog's drinking trough, a pig's trough, a
dustbin, or castor-oil wood, light a fire and produce heat.'

What do you think, brahmin? Would only the fire produced by the high
class people with good quality wood have flames, color, and radiance,
and be usable as fire, and not the fire produced by the low class people
with poor quality wood?"

"No, Mister Gotama. The fire produced by the high class people with good
quality wood would have flames, color, and radiance, and be usable as
fire, and so would the fire produced by the low class people with poor
quality wood. For all fire has flames, color, and radiance, and is
usable as fire."

"In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,
brahmins, peasants, or menials goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One they refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and
sex. They refrain from using speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're not covetous or malicious, and they have right
view. They succeed in the system of the skillful teaching."

When he had spoken, Esukārī said to him, "Excellent, Mister Gotama!
Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn97">

### [MN 97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Dhanañjāni ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhanañjānisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was wandering in the Southern Hills
together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants.[1762](endnotes.xhtml_note-1762){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1762
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a certain mendicant who had completed
the rainy season residence in Rājagaha went to the Southern Hills, where
he approached Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side. Sāriputta said to him, "Reverend, I hope the Buddha is healthy and
well?"

"He is, reverend."

"And I hope that the mendicant Saṅgha is healthy and well."

"It is."

"Reverend, at the rice checkpoint at the city gate there is a brahmin
named
Dhanañjāni.[1763](endnotes.xhtml_note-1763){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1763
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I hope that he is healthy and well?"

"He too is well."

"But is he diligent?"

"How could he possibly be diligent? Dhanañjāni robs the brahmins and
householders in the name of the king, and he robs the king in the name
of the brahmins and householders. His wife, a lady of faith who he
married from a family of faith, has passed
away.[1764](endnotes.xhtml_note-1764){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1764
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And he has taken a new wife who has no
faith."

"Oh, it's bad news to hear that Dhanañjāni is negligent. Hopefully, some
time or other I'll get to meet him, and we can have a discussion."

When Sāriputta had stayed in the Southern Hills as long as he pleased,
he set out for Rājagaha. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at
Rājagaha, where he stayed in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

Then he robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered
Rājagaha for alms. Now at that time Dhanañjāni was having his cows
milked in a cow-shed outside the city. Then Sāriputta wandered for alms
in Rājagaha. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he approached
Dhanañjāni.

Seeing Sāriputta coming off in the distance, Dhanañjāni went to him and
said, "Here, Mister Sāriputta, drink some fresh milk before the meal
time."

"Enough, brahmin, I've finished eating for today. I shall be at the root
of that tree for the day's meditation. Come see me there."

"Yes, sir," replied Dhanañjāni.

When Dhanañjāni had finished breakfast he went to Sāriputta and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to him, "I hope
you're diligent, Dhanañjāni?"

"How can I possibly be diligent, Mister Sāriputta? I have to provide for
my mother and father, my wives and children, and my bondservants and
workers. And I have to make the proper offerings to friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin, guests, ancestors, deities, and king. And
then this body must also be fattened and built
up."[1765](endnotes.xhtml_note-1765){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1765
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, Dhanañjāni? Suppose someone was to behave in an
unprincipled and unjust way for the sake of their parents. Because of
this the wardens of hell would drag them to hell. Could they get out of
being dragged to hell by pleading that they had acted for the sake of
their parents? Or could their parents save them by pleading that the
acts had been done for their sake?"

"No, Mister Sāriputta. Rather, even as they were wailing the wardens of
hell would cast them down into hell."

"What do you think, Dhanañjāni? Suppose someone was to behave in an
unprincipled and unjust way for the sake of their wives and children ...
bondservants and workers ... friends and colleagues ... relatives and
kin ... guests ... ancestors ... deities ... king ... fattening and
building up their body. Because of this the wardens of hell would drag
them to hell. Could they get out of being dragged to hell by pleading
that they had acted for the sake of fattening and building up their
body? Or could anyone else save them by pleading that the acts had been
done for that reason?"

"No, Mister Sāriputta. Rather, even as they were wailing the wardens of
hell would cast them down into hell."

"Who do you think is better, Dhanañjāni? Someone who, for the sake of
their parents, behaves in an unprincipled and unjust manner, or someone
who behaves in a principled and just manner?"

"Someone who behaves in a principled and just manner for the sake of
their parents. For principled and moral conduct is better than
unprincipled and immoral conduct."

"Dhanañjāni, others have livelihoods that are both profitable and
legitimate. By means of these it's possible to provide for your parents,
avoid bad deeds, and practice the path of goodness.

Who do you think is better, Dhanañjāni? Someone who, for the sake of
their wives and children ... bondservants and workers ... friends and
colleagues ... relatives and kin ... guests ... ancestors ... deities
... king ... fattening and building up their body, behaves in an
unprincipled and unjust manner, or someone who behaves in a principled
and just manner?"

"Someone who behaves in a principled and just manner. For principled and
moral conduct is better than unprincipled and immoral conduct."

"Dhanañjāni, others have livelihoods that are both profitable and
legitimate. By means of these it's possible to fatten and build up your
body, avoid bad deeds, and practice the path of goodness."

Then Dhanañjāni the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what
Venerable Sāriputta said, got up from his seat and left.

Some time later Dhanañjāni became sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then he
addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow
with your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the brahmin Dhanañjāni is
sick, suffering, gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' Then
go to Venerable Sāriputta, and in my name bow with your head to his
feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the brahmin Dhanañjāni is sick, suffering,
gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir,
please visit Dhanañjāni at his home out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Dhanañjāni asked. Sāriputta
consented with silence.

He robed up, and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Dhanañjāni's home,
where he sat on the seat spread out and said to Dhanañjāni, "I hope
you're keeping well, Dhanañjāni; I hope you're all right. And I hope the
pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its
growing."

"I'm not keeping well, Mister Sāriputta, I'm not getting by. The pain is
terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its
fading. The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong
man drilling into my head with a sharp point. I'm not keeping well. The
pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a
tough leather strap around my head. I'm not keeping well. The winds
slicing my belly are so severe, like a deft butcher or their apprentice
were slicing open a cows's belly with a sharp meat cleaver. I'm not
keeping well. The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like two
strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a
pit of glowing coals. I'm not keeping well, Mister Sāriputta, I'm not
getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is
evident, not its fading."

"Dhanañjāni, which do you think is better: hell or the animal realm?"

"The animal realm is better."

"Which do you think is better: the animal realm or the ghost realm?"

"The ghost realm is better."

"Which do you think is better: the ghost realm or human life?"

"Human life is better."

"Which do you think is better: human life or as one of the gods of the
four great kings?"

"The gods of the four great
kings."[1766](endnotes.xhtml_note-1766){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1766
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the gods of the four great kings or the
gods of the thirty-three?"

"The gods of the
thirty-three."[1767](endnotes.xhtml_note-1767){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1767
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the gods of the thirty-three or the gods
of Yama?"

"The gods of
Yama."[1768](endnotes.xhtml_note-1768){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1768
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the gods of Yama or the joyful gods?"

"The joyful
gods."[1769](endnotes.xhtml_note-1769){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1769
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the joyful gods or the gods who love to
imagine?"

"The gods who love to
imagine."[1770](endnotes.xhtml_note-1770){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1770
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the gods who love to imagine or the gods
who control what is imagined by others?"

"The gods who control what is imagined by
others."[1771](endnotes.xhtml_note-1771){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1771
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Which do you think is better: the gods who control what is imagined by
others or the Brahmā realm?"

"Mister Sāriputta speaks of the Brahmā realm! Mister Sāriputta speaks of
the Brahmā realm!"

Then Sāriputta thought:

"These brahmins are devoted to the Brahmā realm. Why don't I teach him a
path to the company of Brahmā?"

"Dhanañjāni, I shall teach you a path to the company of Brahmā. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Dhanañjāni. Venerable Sāriputta said this:

"And what is a path to company with
Brahmā?[1772](endnotes.xhtml_note-1772){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1772
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Firstly, a mendicant meditates spreading a
heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
This is a path to company with Brahmā.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
...

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will. This is a path to company with Brahmā."

"Well then, Mister Sāriputta, in my name bow with your head at the
Buddha's feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the brahmin Dhanañjāni is sick,
suffering, gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.'" Then
Sāriputta, after establishing Dhanañjāni in the inferior Brahmā realm,
got up from his seat and left while there was still more left to do. Not
long after Sāriputta had departed, Dhanañjāni passed away and was reborn
in the Brahmā realm.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, Sāriputta, after
establishing Dhanañjāni in the inferior Brahmā realm, got up from his
seat and left while there was still more left to do."

Then Sāriputta went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said, "Sir, the brahmin Dhanañjāni is sick, suffering, gravely ill. He
bows with his head to your feet."

"But Sāriputta, after establishing Dhanañjāni in the inferior Brahmā
realm, why did you get up from your seat and leave while there was still
more left to do?"

"Sir, I thought: 'These brahmins are devoted to the Brahmā realm. Why
don't I teach him a path to the company of Brahmā?'"

"And Sāriputta, the brahmin Dhanañjāni has passed away and been reborn
in the Brahmā
realm."[1773](endnotes.xhtml_note-1773){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1773
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn98">

### [MN 98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vāseṭṭha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vāseṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1774](endnotes.xhtml_note-1774){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1774
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in a forest near Icchānaṅgala.

Now at that time several very well-known well-to-do brahmins were
residing in Icchānaṅgala. They included the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha,
Pokkharasāti, Jānussoṇi, Todeyya, and
others.[1775](endnotes.xhtml_note-1775){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1775
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then as the brahmin students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were going for a
walk they began to discuss the
question:[1776](endnotes.xhtml_note-1776){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1776
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "How do you become a brahmin?"

Bhāradvāja said this: "When you're well born on both your mother's and
father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal
generation---[1777](endnotes.xhtml_note-1777){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1777
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} then you're a brahmin."

Vāseṭṭha said this: "When you're ethical and accomplished in doing your
duties---[1778](endnotes.xhtml_note-1778){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1778
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} then you're a brahmin."

But neither was able to persuade the other.

So Vāseṭṭha said to Bhāradvāja, "Mister Bhāradvāja, the ascetic
Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---is staying in a
forest near Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' Come, let's go to
see him and ask him about this matter. As he answers, so we'll remember
it."

"Yes, sir," replied Bhāradvāja.

So they went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side,
and Vāseṭṭha addressed the Buddha in verse:

> "We're both authorized masters\
> of the three Vedas.\
> I'm a student of
> Pokkharasāti,[1779](endnotes.xhtml_note-1779){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1779
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and he of
> Tārukkha.[1780](endnotes.xhtml_note-1780){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1780
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> We're fully qualified\
> in all the Vedic experts teach.\
> As philologists and grammarians,\
> we match our tutors in recitation.\
> We have a dispute\
> regarding genealogy.
>
> For Bhāradvāja says that\
> one is a brahmin due to birth,\
> but I declare it's because of one's deeds.\
> Oh Clear-eyed One, know this as our debate.
>
> Since neither of us was able\
> to convince the other,\
> we've come to ask you, sir,\
> renowned as the awakened one.
>
> As people honor with joined palms\
> the moon on the cusp of waxing,\
> bowing, they revere\
> Gotama in the world.
>
> We ask this of
> Gotama,[1781](endnotes.xhtml_note-1781){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1781
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> the Eye arisen in the world:\
> is one a brahmin due to birth,\
> or else because of deeds?\
> We don't know, please tell us,\
> so we can recognize a brahmin."
>
> "I shall explain to you,"\
> [said the Buddha, ]{.speaker}\
> "accurately and in sequence,\
> the taxonomy of living creatures,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> Know the grass and trees,\
> though they lack self-awareness.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed
> diverse.[1782](endnotes.xhtml_note-1782){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1782
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Next there are bugs and moths,\
> and so on, to ants and termites.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> Know the quadrupeds, too,\
> both small and large.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> Know, too, the long-backed snakes,\
> crawling on their bellies.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> Next know the fish,\
> whose habitat is the water.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> Next know the birds,\
> winged chariots in flight.\
> They're defined by birth,\
> for species are indeed diverse.
>
> While the differences between these species\
> are defined by birth,\
> the differences between humans\
> are not defined by
> birth.[1783](endnotes.xhtml_note-1783){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1783
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Not by hair nor by head,\
> not by ear nor by eye,\
> not by mouth nor by nose,\
> not by lips nor by eyebrow,
>
> not by shoulder nor by neck,\
> not by belly nor by back,\
> not by buttocks nor by breast,\
> not by groin nor by genitals,
>
> not by hands nor by feet,\
> not by fingers nor by nails,\
> not by knees nor by thighs,\
> not by color nor by voice:\
> none of these are defined by birth\
> as it is for other species.
>
> In individual human bodies\
> you can't find such distinctions.\
> The distinctions among humans\
> are spoken of by
> convention.[1784](endnotes.xhtml_note-1784){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1784
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off keeping cattle:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a farmer, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off various
> professions:[1785](endnotes.xhtml_note-1785){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1785
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a professional, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off trade:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a trader, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off serving others:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a servant, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off stealing:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a bandit, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off archery:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a soldier, not a brahmin.
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who lives off priesthood:\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a sacrificer, not a
> brahmin.[1786](endnotes.xhtml_note-1786){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1786
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Anyone among humans\
> who taxes village and
> nation,[1787](endnotes.xhtml_note-1787){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1787
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as a ruler, not a brahmin.
>
> I don't call someone a brahmin\
> after the mother's womb they're born from.\
> If they still have attachments,\
> they're just someone who says
> 'mister'.[1788](endnotes.xhtml_note-1788){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1788
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Having nothing, taking nothing:\
> that's who I call a
> brahmin.[1789](endnotes.xhtml_note-1789){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1789
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Having cut off all fetters\
> they have no anxiety;\
> they've slipped their chains and are detached:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've cut the strap and harness,\
> the reins and bridle too;\
> with cross-bar lifted, they're
> awakened:[1790](endnotes.xhtml_note-1790){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1790
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Abuse, killing, caging:\
> they endure these without anger.\
> Patience is their powerful army:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Not irritable or pretentious,\
> dutiful in precepts and observances,\
> tamed, bearing their final body:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Like rain off a lotus leaf,\
> like a mustard seed off the point of a pin,\
> sensual pleasures slip off them:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They understand for themselves\
> the end of suffering in this life;\
> with burden put down, detached:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Deep in wisdom, intelligent,\
> expert in what is the path `<j>`{=html}and what is not the
> path;[1791](endnotes.xhtml_note-1791){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1791
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> arrived at the highest goal:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Mixing with neither\
> householders nor the homeless;\
> a migrant with no shelter, few in
> wishes:[1792](endnotes.xhtml_note-1792){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1792
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've laid aside violence\
> against creatures firm and frail;\
> not killing or making others kill:\
> that's who I call a
> brahmin.[1793](endnotes.xhtml_note-1793){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1793
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Not fighting among those who fight,\
> quenched among those who are armed,\
> not grasping among those who grasp:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've discarded greed and hate,\
> along with conceit and contempt,\
> like a mustard seed off the point of a pin:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> The words they utter\
> are sweet, informative, and true,\
> and don't offend anyone:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They don't steal anything in the world,\
> long or short,\
> fine or coarse, beautiful or ugly:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They have no
> hope[1794](endnotes.xhtml_note-1794){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1794
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> for this world or the next;\
> with no need for hope, detached:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They have no clinging,\
> knowledge has freed them of indecision,\
> they've arrived at the culmination of freedom from death:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've escaped the snare\
> of both good and bad deeds;\
> sorrowless, stainless, pure:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Pure as the spotless moon,\
> clear and undisturbed,\
> they've ended desire to be reborn:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've got past this grueling swamp\
> of delusion, transmigration.\
> Meditating in stillness, free of indecision,\
> they have crossed over to the far shore.\
> They're quenched by not grasping:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've given up sensual stimulations,\
> and have gone forth from lay life;\
> they've ended rebirth in the sensual realm:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've given up craving,\
> and have gone forth from lay life;\
> they've ended craving to be reborn:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They've thrown off the human yoke,\
> and slipped out of the heavenly yoke;\
> unyoked from all yokes:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Giving up discontent and desire,\
> they're cooled and free of attachments;\
> a hero, master of the whole world:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They know the passing away\
> and rebirth of all beings;\
> unattached, holy, awakened:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Gods, centaurs, and humans\
> don't know their destiny;\
> the perfected ones with defilements ended:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They have nothing before or after,\
> or even in between.\
> Having nothing, taking nothing:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> Leader of the herd, excellent hero,\
> great seer and victor;\
> unstirred, washed, awakened:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> They who know their past lives,\
> see heaven and places of loss,\
> and have attained the end of rebirth:\
> that's who I call a brahmin.
>
> For name and clan are formulated\
> as mere convention in the world.\
> Produced by mutual agreement,\
> they're formulated for each individual.
>
> For a long time this misconception\
> has prejudiced those who don't understand.\
> Ignorant, they declare\
> that one is a brahmin by birth.
>
> You're not a brahmin by birth,\
> nor by birth a non-brahmin.\
> You're a brahmin by your deeds,\
> and by deeds a
> non-brahmin.[1795](endnotes.xhtml_note-1795){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1795
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> You're a farmer by your deeds,\
> by deeds you're a professional;\
> you're a trader by your deeds,\
> by deeds are you a servant;
>
> you're a bandit by your deeds,\
> by deeds you're a soldier;\
> you're a sacrificer by your deeds,\
> by deeds you're a ruler.
>
> In this way the astute regard deeds\
> in accord with truth.\
> Seeing dependent origination,\
> they're expert in deeds and their results.
>
> Deeds make the world go on,\
> deeds make people go on;\
> sentient beings are bound by deeds,\
> like a moving chariot's linchpin.
>
> By fervor and spiritual practice,\
> by restraint and by self-control:\
> that's how to become a brahmin,\
> this is the supreme
> brahmin.[1796](endnotes.xhtml_note-1796){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1796
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Accomplished in the three knowledges,\
> peaceful, with rebirth ended,\
> know them, Vāseṭṭha,\
> as Brahmā and Sakka to the
> wise."[1797](endnotes.xhtml_note-1797){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1797
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja said to him, "Excellent,
Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We go for refuge
to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From
this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us as lay followers who have
gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn99">

### [MN 99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Subha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Subhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's son, was residing
in Sāvatthī at a certain householder's home on some
business.[1798](endnotes.xhtml_note-1798){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1798
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then Subha said to that householder,
"Householder, I have heard
that[1799](endnotes.xhtml_note-1799){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1799
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sāvatthī does not lack for perfected ones.
What ascetic or brahmin might we pay homage to today?"

"Sir, the Buddha is staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. You can pay homage to him."

Acknowledging that householder, Subha went to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins say: 'Laypeople succeed in the system of
the skillful teaching, not
renunciates.'[1800](endnotes.xhtml_note-1800){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1800
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What do you say about this?"

"On this point, student, I speak after analyzing the
question,[1801](endnotes.xhtml_note-1801){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1801
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} not one-sidedly. I don't praise wrong
practice for either laypeople or renunciates. Because of wrong practice,
neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the system of the skillful
teaching. I praise right practice for both laypeople and renunciates.
Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the
system of the skillful teaching."

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins say: 'Since the work of the lay life has
many requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings it is very
fruitful.[1802](endnotes.xhtml_note-1802){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1802
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But since the work of the renunciate has
few requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings it is not very
fruitful.' What do you say about this?"

"On this point, too, I speak after analyzing the question, not
one-sidedly. Some work has many requirements, duties, issues, and
undertakings, and when it fails it's not very fruitful. Some work has
many requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it
succeeds it is very fruitful. Some work has few requirements, duties,
issues, and undertakings, and when it fails it's not very fruitful. Some
work has few requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it
succeeds it is very fruitful.

And what work has many requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings,
and when it fails it's not very fruitful? Farming. And what work has
many requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it
succeeds it is very fruitful? Again, it is farming. And what work has
few requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it fails
it's not very fruitful? Trade. And what work has few requirements,
duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it succeeds it is very
fruitful? Again, it's trade.

The lay life is like farming in that it's work with many requirements
and when it fails it's not very fruitful; but when it succeeds it is
very fruitful. The renunciate life is like trade in that it's work with
few requirements and when it fails it's not very fruitful; but when it
succeeds it is very fruitful."

"Mister Gotama, the brahmins prescribe five things for making merit and
succeeding in the skillful."

"If you don't mind, please explain these in this assembly."

"It's no trouble when good sirs such as yourself are sitting here."

"Well, speak then, student."

"Mister Gotama, truth is the first thing. Fervor is the second
thing.[1803](endnotes.xhtml_note-1803){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1803
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Celibacy is the third thing. Recitation is
the fourth thing. Generosity is the fifth thing. These are the five
things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in
the skillful. What do you say about this?"

"Well, student, is there even a single one of the brahmins who says
this:[1804](endnotes.xhtml_note-1804){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1804
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I declare the result of these five things
after realizing it with my own insight'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, is there even a single tutor of the brahmins, or a tutor's tutor,
or anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors, who says this: 'I
declare the result of these five things after realizing it with my own
insight'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"Well, what of the ancient seers of the brahmins, namely Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha,
Kassapa, and Bhagu? They were the authors and propagators of the hymns.
Their hymnal was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient times; and
these days, brahmins continue to sing and chant it, chanting what was
chanted and teaching what was taught. Did even they say: 'We declare the
result of these five things after realizing it with our own insight'?"

"No, Mister Gotama."

"So, student, it seems that there is not a single one of the brahmins,
not even anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors, nor even the
ancient seers of the brahmins who says: 'We declare the result of these
five things after realizing it with our own insight.'

Suppose there was a queue of blind men, each holding the one in front:
the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last
one does not see. In the same way, it seems to me that the brahmins'
statement turns out to be comparable to a queue of blind men: the first
one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not
see."

When he said this, Subha became angry and upset with the Buddha because
of the simile of the queue of blind men. He even attacked and badmouthed
the Buddha himself, saying, "The ascetic Gotama will be worsted!" He
said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, the brahmin Pokkharasāti Upamañña of the Subhaga Forest
says:[1805](endnotes.xhtml_note-1805){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1805
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is exactly what happens with some
ascetics and brahmins. They claim to have a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. But their statement turns
out to be a joke---mere words, vacuous and hollow. For how on earth can
a human being know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones? That is not
possible.'"[1806](endnotes.xhtml_note-1806){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1806
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But student, does Pokkharasāti understand the minds of all these
ascetics and brahmins, having comprehended them with his mind?"

"Mister Gotama, Pokkharasāti doesn't even know the mind of his own
bonded maid Puṇṇikā, so how could he know all those ascetics and
brahmins?"

"Suppose there was a person blind from birth. They couldn't see sights
that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta. They couldn't
see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and sun. They'd
say: 'There's no such thing as dark and bright sights, and no-one who
sees them. There's no such thing as blue, yellow, red, magenta, even and
uneven ground, stars, moon and sun, and no-one who sees these things. I
don't know it or see it, therefore it doesn't
exist.'[1807](endnotes.xhtml_note-1807){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1807
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, Mister Gotama. There are such things as dark and bright sights, and
one who sees them. There is blue, yellow, red, magenta, even and uneven
ground, stars, moon and sun, and one who sees these things. So it's not
right to say this: 'I don't know it or see it, therefore it doesn't
exist.'"

"In the same way, Pokkharasāti is blind and sightless. It is quite
impossible for him to know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

What do you think, student? There are well-to-do brahmins of Kosala such
as the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha, Pokkharasāti, Jānussoṇi, and your
father Todeyya. What's better for them: that their speech agrees or
disagrees with the consensus of opinion?"

"That it agrees, Mister Gotama."

"What's better for them: that their speech is thoughtful or
thoughtless?"

"That it is thoughtful."

"What's better for them: that their speech follows reflection or is
unreflective?"

"That it follows reflection."

"What's better for them: that their speech is beneficial or worthless?"

"That it's beneficial."

"What do you think, student? If this is so, does Pokkharasāti's speech
agree or disagree with the consensus of opinion?"

"It disagrees, Mister Gotama."

"Is it thoughtful or thoughtless?"

"Thoughtless."

"Is it reflective or unreflective?"

"Unreflective."

"Is it beneficial or worthless?"

"Worthless."

"Student, there are these five hindrances. What five? The hindrances of
sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and
remorse, and doubt. These are the five hindrances. Pokkharasāti is
veiled, shrouded, covered, and engulfed by these five
hindrances.[1808](endnotes.xhtml_note-1808){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1808
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is quite impossible for him to know or
see or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy
of the noble ones.

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? There are
sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. There are sounds known by the ear ...
smells known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches
known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

Pokkharasāti enjoys himself with these five kinds of sensual
stimulation, tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not
understanding the escape. It is quite impossible for him to know or see
or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of
the noble ones.

What do you think, student? Which would have better flames, color, and
radiance: a fire that depends on grass and logs as fuel, or one that
does not?"

"If it were possible for a fire to burn without depending on grass and
logs as fuel, that would have better flames, color, and radiance."

"But it isn't possible, except by psychic power. Rapture that depends on
the five kinds of sensual stimulation is like a fire that depends on
grass and logs as fuel. Rapture that's apart from sensual pleasures and
unskillful qualities is like a fire that doesn't depend on grass and
logs as fuel.

And what is rapture that's apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful
qualities? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is rapture that's apart
from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This too is
rapture that's apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

Of the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and
succeeding in the skillful, which do they say is the most fruitful?"

"Generosity."

"What do you think, student? Suppose a brahmin was setting up a big
sacrifice. Then two brahmins came along, thinking to participate. Then
one of those brahmins thought: 'Oh, I hope that I alone get the best
seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in the refectory, not some
other
brahmin.'[1809](endnotes.xhtml_note-1809){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1809
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that some other brahmin
gets the best seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in the
refectory. Thinking, 'Some other brahmin has got the best seat, the best
drink, the best almsfood,' they get angry and bitter. What do the
brahmins say is the result of this?"

"Mister Gotama, brahmins don't give gifts so that others will get angry
and upset. Rather, they give only out of sympathy."

"In that case, isn't compassion a sixth ground for making merit?"

"In that case, compassion is a sixth ground for making
merit."[1810](endnotes.xhtml_note-1810){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1810
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Of the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and
succeeding in the skillful, where do you usually find them: among
laypeople or renunciates?"

"Mostly among renunciates, and less so among lay people. For a lay
person has many requirements, duties, issues, and undertakings, and they
can't always tell the truth, be fervent, be celibate, do lots of
recitation, or be very generous. But a renunciate has few requirements,
duties, issues, and undertakings, and they can always tell the truth, be
fervent, be celibate, do lots of recitation, and be very generous. Of
the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and
succeeding in the skillful, I usually find them among renunciates, and
less so among laypeople."

"I say that the five things prescribed by the brahmins for making merit
are prerequisites of the mind for developing a mind free of enmity and
ill will.

Take a mendicant who speaks the truth. Thinking, 'I'm truthful,' they
find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected
with the teaching. And I say that joy connected with the skillful is a
prerequisite of the mind for developing a mind free of enmity and ill
will.

Take a mendicant who is fervent ... is celibate ... does lots of
recitation ... and is very generous. Thinking, 'I'm very generous,' they
find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected
with the teaching. And I say that joy connected with the skillful is a
prerequisite of the mind for developing a mind free of enmity and ill
will. I say that these five things prescribed by the brahmins for making
merit are prerequisites of the mind for developing a mind free of enmity
and ill will."

When he had spoken, Subha said to him, "Mister Gotama, I have heard that
the ascetic Gotama knows a path to company with Brahmā."

"What do you think, student? Is the village of Naḷakāra nearby?"

"Yes it is, sir."

"What do you think, student? Suppose a person was born and raised in
Naḷakāra. And as soon as they left the town some people asked them for
the road to Naḷakāra. Would they be slow or hesitant to answer?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because they were born and raised in
Naḷakāra. They're well acquainted with all the roads to the village."

"Still, it's possible they might be slow or hesitant to answer. But the
Realized One is never slow or hesitant when questioned about the Brahmā
realm or the practice that leads to the Brahmā realm. I understand
Brahmā, the Brahmā realm, and the practice that leads to the Brahmā
realm, practicing in accordance with which one is reborn in the Brahmā
realm."

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that the ascetic Gotama teaches a path to
company with Brahmā. Please teach me that
path."[1811](endnotes.xhtml_note-1811){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1811
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, student, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Subha. The Buddha said this:

"And what is a path to company with Brahmā? Firstly, a mendicant
meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. When the heart's release by love has been developed like this,
any limited deeds they've done don't remain or persist there. Suppose
there was a powerful horn blower. They'd easily make themselves heard in
the four quarters. In the same way, when the heart's release by love has
been developed like this, any limited deeds they've done don't remain or
persist there. This is a path to company with Brahmā.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
...

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will. When the heart's release by equanimity has been
developed and cultivated like this, any limited deeds they've done don't
remain or persist there. Suppose there was a powerful horn blower.
They'd easily make themselves heard in the four quarters. In the same
way, when the heart's release by equanimity has been developed and
cultivated like this, any limited deeds they've done don't remain or
persist there. This too is a path to company with Brahmā."

When he had spoken, Subha said to him, "Excellent, Mister Gotama!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama has
made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[1812](endnotes.xhtml_note-1812){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1812
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life. Well,
now, Mister Gotama, I must go. I have many duties, and much to
do."[1813](endnotes.xhtml_note-1813){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1813
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Please, student, go at your convenience." And then Subha approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
leaving.

Now at that time the brahmin Jānussoṇi drove out from Sāvatthī in the
middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn by mares. He saw the
student Subha coming off in the distance, and said to him, "So, Mister
Bhāradvāja, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?"

"Just now, good sir, I've come from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"What do you think of the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom? Do you
think he's astute?"

"My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom?
You'd really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of
wisdom."

"Mister Bhāradvāja praises the ascetic Gotama with lofty praise indeed."

"Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? He is praised by the praised as
the best among gods and humans. The five things that the brahmins
prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful he says are
prerequisites of the mind for developing a mind free of enmity and ill
will."

When he had spoken, Jānussoṇi got down from his chariot, arranged his
robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and
expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times, "King Pasenadi of Kosala
is lucky, so very lucky that the Realized One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha is living in his realm!"

</article>
<article id="mn100">

### [MN 100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. Now at
that time a brahmin lady named Dhanañjānī was residing at Caṇḍalakappa.
She was devoted to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. Once, she
tripped and expressed this heartfelt sentiment three
times:[1814](endnotes.xhtml_note-1814){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1814
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!"

Now at that time the brahmin student Saṅgārava was residing in
Caṇḍalakappa. He was young, newly tonsured; he was sixteen years old. He
had mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and
ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the
testaments as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He
was well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great
man.[1815](endnotes.xhtml_note-1815){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1815
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Hearing Dhanañjānī's exclamation, he said to her, "The brahmin lady
Dhanañjānī is a disgrace! Though brahmins proficient in the three Vedas
are found, she praises that shaveling, that fake
ascetic."[1816](endnotes.xhtml_note-1816){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1816
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But dearest boy, you don't understand the Buddha's ethics and wisdom.
If you did, you'd never think of abusing or insulting him."

"Well then, ma'am, let me know when the Buddha arrives in Caṇḍalakappa."

"I will, dearest," she replied.

And then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the Kosalan lands,
arrived at Caṇḍalakappa, where he stayed in the mango grove of the
Todeyya brahmins.

Dhanañjānī heard that he had arrived. So she went to Saṅgārava and told
him, adding, "Please, dearest boy, go at your convenience."

"Yes, ma'am," replied Saṅgārava. He went to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with
him.[1817](endnotes.xhtml_note-1817){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1817
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, there are some ascetics and brahmins who claim to have
mastered the fundamentals of the spiritual life having attained
perfection and consummation of insight in the present
life.[1818](endnotes.xhtml_note-1818){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1818
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Where do you stand regarding these?"

"I say there is a diversity among those who claim to have mastered the
fundamentals of the spiritual life having attained perfection and
consummation of insight in the present life. There are some ascetics and
brahmins who are oral transmitters. Through oral transmission they claim
to have mastered the fundamentals of the spiritual life. For example,
the brahmins who are proficient in the three Vedas. There are some
ascetics and brahmins who solely by mere faith claim to have mastered
the fundamentals of the spiritual life. For example, those who rely on
logic and
inquiry.[1819](endnotes.xhtml_note-1819){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1819
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are some ascetics and brahmins who,
having directly known for themselves the principle regarding teachings
not learned before from another, claim to have mastered the fundamentals
of the spiritual life. I am one of those. And here's a way to understand
that I am one of them.

Before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I thought: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone
forth is wide open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the
spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I
shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the
lay life to homelessness?' Some time later, while still with pristine
black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life---though my mother
and father wished otherwise, weeping with tearful faces---I shaved off
my hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay
life to homelessness.

Once I had gone forth I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking
the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said
to
him,[1820](endnotes.xhtml_note-1820){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1820
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Reverend Kālāma, I wish to lead the
spiritual life in this teaching and training.'

Āḷāra Kālāma replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a
sensible person can soon realize their own tradition with their own
insight and live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Āḷāra
Kālāma declares: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live
having achieved it." Surely he meditates knowing and seeing this
teaching.'

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him: 'Reverend Kālāma, to what
extent do you say you've realized this teaching with your own insight?'
When I said this, he declared the dimension of nothingness.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Āḷāra Kālāma who has faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why
don't I make an effort to realize the same teaching that Āḷāra Kālāma
says he has realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that
teaching with my own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him, 'Reverend Kālāma, is it up
to this point that you realized this teaching with your own insight, and
declare having achieved it?'

'I have, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
I've realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, I've realized with my own insight, and declare having
achieved it. So the teaching that I know, you know, and the teaching you
know, I know. I am like you and you are like me. Come now, reverend! We
should both lead this community together.'

And that is how my tutor Āḷāra Kālāma placed me, his student, on the
same position as him, and honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of nothingness.' Realizing
that this teaching was inadequate, I left disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,
'Reverend, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and
training.'

Uddaka replied, 'Stay, venerable. This teaching is such that a sensible
person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and
live having achieved it.'

I quickly memorized that teaching. As far as lip-recital and verbal
repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine.
I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

Then it occurred to me, 'It is not solely by mere faith that Rāma
declared: "I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having
achieved it." Surely he meditated knowing and seeing this teaching.'

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, to what
extent did Rāma say he'd realized this teaching with his own insight?'
When I said this, Uddaka son of Rāma declared the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.

Then it occurred to me, 'It's not just Rāma who had faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom; I too have these things. Why don't I
make an effort to realize the same teaching that Rāma said he had
realized with his own insight?' I quickly realized that teaching with my
own insight, and lived having achieved it.

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him, 'Reverend, had Rāma
realized this teaching with his own insight up to this point, and
declared having achieved it?'

'He had, reverend.'

'I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point,
and live having achieved it.'

'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to see a venerable such
as yourself as one of our spiritual companions! So the teaching that
Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it,
you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it. The
teaching that you've realized with your own insight, and dwell having
achieved it, Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having
achieved it. So the teaching that Rāma directly knew, you know, and the
teaching you know, Rāma directly knew. Rāma was like you and you are
like Rāma. Come now, reverend! You should lead this community.' And that
is how my spiritual companion Uddaka son of Rāma placed me in the
position of a tutor, and honored me with lofty praise.

Then it occurred to me, 'This teaching doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It
only leads as far as rebirth in dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left
disappointed.

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of
sublime peace. Traveling stage by stage in the Magadhan lands, I arrived
at Senānigama in Uruvelā. There I saw a delightful park, a lovely grove
with a flowing river that was clean and charming, with smooth banks. And
nearby was a village for alms. Then it occurred to me, 'This park is
truly delightful, a lovely grove with a flowing river that's clean and
charming, with smooth banks. And nearby there's a village to go for
alms. This is good enough for striving for a gentleman wanting to
strive.' So I sat down right there, thinking: 'This is good enough for
striving.'

And then these three similes, which were neither supernaturally
inspired, nor learned before in the past, occurred to
me.[1821](endnotes.xhtml_note-1821){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1821
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose there was a green, sappy log, and
it was lying in water. Then a person comes along with a drill-stick,
thinking to light a fire and produce heat. What do you think,
Bhāradvāja? By drilling the stick against that green, sappy log lying in
water, could they light a fire and produce heat?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because it's a green, sappy log, and
it's lying in the water. That person will eventually get weary and
frustrated."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't live
withdrawn in body and mind from sensual pleasures. They haven't
internally given up or stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst,
and passion for sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they
suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion, they
are incapable of knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was
the first example that occurred to me.

Then a second example occurred to me. Suppose there was a green, sappy
log, and it was lying on dry land far from the water. Then a person
comes along with a drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and produce
heat. What do you think, Bhāradvāja? By drilling the stick against that
green, sappy log on dry land far from water, could they light a fire and
produce heat?"

"No, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because it's still a green, sappy log,
despite the fact that it's lying on dry land far from water. That person
will eventually get weary and frustrated." "In the same way, there are
ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in body and mind from sensual
pleasures. But they haven't internally given up or stilled desire,
affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for sensual pleasures.
Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute
feelings due to overexertion, they are incapable of knowledge and
vision, of supreme awakening. This was the second example that occurred
to me.

Then a third example occurred to me. Suppose there was a dried up,
withered log, and it was lying on dry land far from the water. Then a
person comes along with a drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and
produce heat. What do you think, Bhāradvāja? By drilling the stick
against that dried up, withered log on dry land far from water, could
they light a fire and produce heat?"

"Yes, Mister Gotama. Why is that? Because it's a dried up, withered log,
and it's lying on dry land far from water."

"In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who live withdrawn in
body and mind from sensual pleasures. And they have internally given up
and stilled desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and passion for
sensual pleasures. Regardless of whether or not they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion, they are capable of
knowledge and vision, of supreme awakening. This was the third example
that occurred to me. These are the three similes, which were neither
supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past, that occurred
to me.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I, with teeth clenched and tongue
pressed against the roof of my mouth, squeeze, squash, and scorch mind
with mind?' So that's what I did, until sweat ran from my armpits. It
was like when a strong man grabs a weaker man by the head or throat or
shoulder and squeezes, squashes, and crushes them. In the same way, with
teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I
squeezed, squashed, and crushed mind with mind until sweat ran from my
armpits. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my mindfulness was
established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not tranquil, because
I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then winds came out my ears making a loud noise, like the puffing of a
blacksmith's bellows. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then strong winds ground my head, like a strong man was drilling into my
head with a sharp point. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then I got a severe headache, like a strong man was tightening a tough
leather strap around my head. My energy was roused up and unflagging,
and my mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed,
not tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then strong winds carved up my belly, like a deft butcher or their
apprentice was slicing my belly open with a sharp meat cleaver. My
energy was roused up and unflagging, and my mindfulness was established
and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not tranquil, because I'd pushed
too hard with that painful striving.

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I keep practicing the breathless
absorption?' So I cut off my breathing through my mouth and nose. But
then there was an intense burning in my body, like two strong men
grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of
glowing coals. My energy was roused up and unflagging, and my
mindfulness was established and lucid, but my body was disturbed, not
tranquil, because I'd pushed too hard with that painful striving.

Then some deities saw me and said, 'The ascetic Gotama is dead.' Others
said, 'He's not dead, but he's dying.' Others said, 'He's not dead or
dying. The ascetic Gotama is a perfected one, for that is how the
perfected ones live.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I practice completely cutting off
food?'

But deities came to me and said, 'Good sir, don't practice totally
cutting off food. If you do, we'll infuse heavenly nectar into your
pores and you will live on that.'

Then it occurred to me, 'If I claim to be completely fasting while these
deities are infusing heavenly nectar in my pores, that would be a lie on
my part.' So I dismissed those deities, saying, 'There's no need.'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why don't I just take a little bit of food each
time, a cup of broth made from mung beans, horse gram, chickpeas, or
green gram?' So that's what I did, until my body became extremely
emaciated. Due to eating so little, my major and minor limbs became like
the joints of an eighty-year-old or a dying man, my bottom became like a
camel's hoof, my vertebrae stuck out like beads on a string, and my ribs
were as gaunt as the broken-down rafters on an old barn. Due to eating
so little, the gleam of my eyes sank deep in their sockets, like the
gleam of water sunk deep down a well. Due to eating so little, my scalp
shriveled and withered like a green bitter-gourd in the wind and sun.
Due to eating so little, the skin of my belly stuck to my backbone, so
that when I tried to rub the skin of my belly I grabbed my backbone, and
when I tried to rub my backbone I rubbed the skin of my belly. Due to
eating so little, when I tried to urinate or defecate I fell face down
right there. Due to eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by
rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

Then some people saw me and said: 'The ascetic Gotama is black.' Some
said: 'He's not black, he's brown.' Some said: 'He's neither black nor
brown. The ascetic Gotama has tawny skin.' That's how far the pure,
bright complexion of my skin had been ruined by taking so little food.

Then it occurred to me, 'Whatever ascetics and brahmins have experienced
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion---whether in
the past, future, or present---this is as far as it goes, no-one has
done more than this. But I have not achieved any superhuman distinction
in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones by this severe,
grueling work. Could there be another path to awakening?'

Then it occurred to me, 'I recall sitting in the cool shade of a black
plum tree while my father the Sakyan was off working. Quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered
and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss
born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.
Could that be the path to awakening?' Stemming from that memory came the
realization: '*That* is the path to awakening!'

Then it occurred to me, 'Why am I afraid of that pleasure, for it has
nothing to do with sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities?' I
thought, 'I'm not afraid of that pleasure, for it has nothing to do with
sensual pleasures or unskillful qualities.'

Then it occurred to me, 'I can't achieve that pleasure with a body so
excessively emaciated. Why don't I eat some solid food, some rice and
porridge?' So I ate some solid food.

Now at that time the five mendicants were attending on me, thinking,
'The ascetic Gotama will tell us of any truth that he realizes.' But
when I ate some solid food, they left disappointed in me, saying, 'The
ascetic Gotama has become indulgent; he has strayed from the struggle
and returned to indulgence.'

After eating solid food and gathering my strength, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and
remained in the first absorption ... As the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection of past lives. I
recollected many past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand
rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world
expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. And so I
recollected my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds ...

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. I truly
understood: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it was freed, I
knew it was freed.

I understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.'

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute."

When he had spoken, Saṅgārava said to the
Buddha,[1822](endnotes.xhtml_note-1822){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1822
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "The striving of Mister Gotama was indeed
assiduous and that of a true
person,[1823](endnotes.xhtml_note-1823){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1823
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} since he is a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha. But Mister Gotama, do gods
survive?"[1824](endnotes.xhtml_note-1824){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1824
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I've understood about gods in terms of
causes."[1825](endnotes.xhtml_note-1825){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1825
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Mister Gotama, when asked 'Do gods survive?' why did you say that
you have understood about gods in terms of causes? That being so, is it
not hollow and
false?"[1826](endnotes.xhtml_note-1826){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1826
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"When asked 'Do gods survive', whether you reply 'Gods survive' or 'I've
understood in terms of causes' a sensible person would come to the
categorical conclusion in this matter that gods
survive."[1827](endnotes.xhtml_note-1827){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1827
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But why didn't you say that in the first
place?"[1828](endnotes.xhtml_note-1828){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1828
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It is agreed by the eminent in the world that gods
survive."[1829](endnotes.xhtml_note-1829){#mn-brahmanavagga.xhtml_noteref-1829
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Saṅgārava said to the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister
Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing
the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in
the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama
has made the Teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister
Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day
forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml}

# The Final Fifty {#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn-uparipannasa .section-title .heading}

## The Chapter Beginning With Devadaha {#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_mn-devadahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn101">

### [MN 101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Devadaha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named
Devadaha.[1830](endnotes.xhtml_note-1830){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1830
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine
and view: 'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable,
painful, or neutral---is because of past
deeds.[1831](endnotes.xhtml_note-1831){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1831
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So, due to eliminating past deeds by
fervent mortification, and not doing any new deeds, there's nothing to
come up in the
future.[1832](endnotes.xhtml_note-1832){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1832
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With no future consequence, deeds end. With
the ending of deeds, suffering ends. With the ending of suffering,
feeling ends. And with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have
been worn
away.'[1833](endnotes.xhtml_note-1833){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1833
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is the doctrine of the Jain
ascetics.[1834](endnotes.xhtml_note-1834){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1834
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I've gone up to the Jain ascetics who say this and said, 'Is it really
true that this is the venerables' view?' They admitted that it is.

I said to them, 'But reverends, do you know for sure that you existed in
the past, and it is not the case that you did not exist?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know for sure that you did bad deeds in the
past?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know that you did such and such bad deeds?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know that so much suffering has already been worn
away? Or that so much suffering still remains to be worn away? Or that
when so much suffering is worn away all suffering will have been worn
away?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'But reverends, do you know about giving up unskillful qualities in the
present life and embracing skillful qualities?'

'No we don't, reverend.'

'So it seems that you don't know any of these things. In that case, it's
not appropriate for the Jain venerables to declare this.

Now, supposing you did know these things. In that case, it would be
appropriate for the Jain venerables to declare this.

Suppose a man was struck by an arrow thickly smeared with poison,
causing painful feelings, sharp and severe. Their friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to treat them. The
surgeon would cut open the wound with a scalpel, causing painful
feelings, sharp and severe. They'd probe for the arrow, causing painful
feelings, sharp and severe. They'd extract the arrow, causing painful
feelings, sharp and severe. They'd apply cauterizing medicine to the
wound, causing painful feelings, sharp and severe. After some time that
wound would be healed and the skin regrown. They'd be healthy, happy,
autonomous, master of themselves, able to go where they wanted.

They'd think, "Earlier I was struck by an arrow thickly smeared with
poison, causing painful feelings, sharp and severe. My friends and
colleagues, relatives and kin got a surgeon to treat me. At each step,
the treatment was painful. But these days that wound is healed and the
skin regrown. I'm healthy, happy, autonomous, my own master, able to go
where I want."

In the same way, reverends, if you knew about these things, it would be
appropriate for the Jain venerables to declare this.

But since you don't know any of these things, it's not appropriate for
the Jain venerables to declare this.'

When I said this, those Jain ascetics said to me, 'Reverend, the Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to
know and see everything without exception, thus: "Knowledge and vision
are constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing,
sleeping, and waking."

He says: "O reverend Jain ascetics, you have done bad deeds in a past
life. Wear them away with these severe and grueling austerities. And
when in the present you are restrained in body, speech, and mind, you're
not doing any bad deeds for the future. So, due to eliminating past
deeds by fervent mortification, and not doing any new deeds, there's
nothing to come up in the future. With no future consequence, deeds end.
With the ending of deeds, suffering ends. With the ending of suffering,
feeling ends. And with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have
been worn away." We endorse and accept this, and we are satisfied with
it.'

When they said this, I said to them, 'These five things can be seen to
turn out in two different
ways.[1835](endnotes.xhtml_note-1835){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1835
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What five? Faith, endorsement, oral
transmission, reasoned train of thought, and acceptance of a view after
deliberation. These are the five things that can be seen to turn out in
two different ways. In this case, what faith in your teacher do you have
when it comes to the past? What endorsement, oral transmission, reasoned
train of thought, or acceptance of a view after deliberation?' When I
said this, I did not see any legitimate defense of their doctrine from
the Jains.

Furthermore, I said to those Jain ascetics, 'What do you think,
reverends? At a time of intense exertion and striving do you suffer
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion? Whereas at a
time without intense exertion and striving do you not suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion?'

'Reverend Gotama, at a time of intense exertion we suffer painful, sharp
feelings due to overexertion, not without intense exertion.'

'So it seems that only at a time of intense exertion do you suffer
painful, sharp feelings due to overexertion, not without intense
exertion. In that case, it's not appropriate for the Jain venerables to
declare: "Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful,
or neutral---is because of past deeds. ..."

If at a time of intense exertion you did not suffer painful, sharp
feelings due to overexertion, and if without intense exertion you did
experience such feelings, it would be appropriate for the Jain
venerables to declare this.

But since this is not the case, aren't you experiencing painful, sharp
feelings due only to your own exertion, which out of ignorance,
unknowing, and confusion you misconstrue to
imply:[1836](endnotes.xhtml_note-1836){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1836
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Everything this individual
experiences---pleasurable, painful, or neutral---is because of past
deeds. ..."?' When I said this, I did not see any legitimate defense of
their doctrine from the Jains.

Furthermore, I said to those Jain ascetics, 'What do you think,
reverends? If a deed is to be experienced in this life, can exertion
make it be experienced in lives to
come?'[1837](endnotes.xhtml_note-1837){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1837
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'No, reverend.'

'But if a deed is to be experienced in lives to come, can exertion make
it be experienced in this life?'

'No, reverend.'

'What do you think, reverends? If a deed is to be experienced as
pleasure, can exertion make it be experienced as pain?'

'No, reverend.'

'But if a deed is to be experienced as pain, can exertion make it be
experienced as pleasure?'

'No, reverend.'

'What do you think, reverends? If a deed is to be experienced when fully
ripened, can exertion make it be experienced when not fully ripened?'

'No, reverend.'

'But if a deed is to be experienced when not fully ripened, can exertion
make it be experienced when fully ripened?'

'No, reverend.'

'What do you think, reverends? If a deed is to be experienced strongly,
can exertion make it be experienced weakly?'

'No, reverend.'

'But if a deed is to be experienced weakly, can exertion make it be
experienced strongly?'

'No, reverend.'

'What do you think, reverends? If a deed is to be experienced, can
exertion make it not be experienced?'

'No, reverend.'

'But if a deed is not to be experienced, can exertion make it be
experienced?'[1838](endnotes.xhtml_note-1838){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1838
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'No, reverend.'

'So it seems that exertion cannot change the way deeds are experienced
in any of these ways. This being so, your exertion and striving are
fruitless.'

Such is the doctrine of the Jain ascetics. Saying this, the Jain
ascetics deserve rebuttal and criticism on ten legitimate
grounds.[1839](endnotes.xhtml_note-1839){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1839
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

If sentient beings experience pleasure and pain because of past deeds,
clearly the Jains have done bad deeds in the past, since they now
experience such intense pain. If sentient beings experience pleasure and
pain because of God Almighty's
creation,[1840](endnotes.xhtml_note-1840){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1840
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} clearly the Jains were created by a bad
God, since they now experience such intense pain. If sentient beings
experience pleasure and pain because of circumstance and
nature,[1841](endnotes.xhtml_note-1841){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1841
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} clearly the Jains arise from bad
circumstances, since they now experience such intense pain. If sentient
beings experience pleasure and pain because of the class of
rebirth,[1842](endnotes.xhtml_note-1842){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1842
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} clearly the Jains have been reborn in a bad
class, since they now experience such intense pain. If sentient beings
experience pleasure and pain because of exertion in this life, clearly
the Jains exert themselves badly in this life, since they now experience
such intense
pain.[1843](endnotes.xhtml_note-1843){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1843
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Jains deserve criticism whether or whether not sentient beings
experience pleasure and pain because of past deeds, or God Almighty's
creation, or circumstance and nature, or class of rebirth, or exertion
in this life. Such is the doctrine of the Jain ascetics. The Jain
ascetics who say this deserve rebuttal and criticism on these ten
legitimate grounds. That's how exertion and striving is fruitless.

And how is exertion and striving fruitful? It's when a mendicant doesn't
bring suffering upon themselves; and they don't give up legitimate
pleasure, but they're not besotted with that pleasure. They understand:
'When I actively strive I become dispassionate towards this source of
suffering. But when I develop equanimity I become dispassionate towards
this other source of suffering.' So they either actively strive or
develop equanimity as appropriate. Through active striving they become
dispassionate towards that specific source of suffering, and so that
suffering is worn away. Through developing equanimity they become
dispassionate towards that other source of suffering, and so that
suffering is worn away.

Suppose a man is in love with a woman, full of intense desire and lust.
Then he sees her standing together with another man, chatting, giggling,
and laughing.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that give rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress for him?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because that man is in love with that woman,
full of intense desire and lust."

"Then that man might think: 'I'm in love with that woman, full of
intense desire and lust. When I saw her standing together with another
man, chatting, giggling, and laughing, it gave rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress for me. Why don't I give up
that desire and lust for that woman?' So that's what he did. Some time
later he sees her again standing together with another man, chatting,
giggling, and laughing.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that give rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress for him?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because he no longer desires that woman."

"In the same way, a mendicant doesn't bring suffering upon themselves;
and they don't give up legitimate pleasure, but they're not besotted
with that pleasure. They understand: 'When I actively strive I become
dispassionate towards this source of suffering. But when I develop
equanimity I become dispassionate towards this other source of
suffering.' So they either actively strive or develop equanimity as
appropriate. Through active striving they become dispassionate towards
that specific source of suffering, and so that suffering is worn away.
Through developing equanimity they become dispassionate towards that
other source of suffering, and so that suffering is worn away. That's
how exertion and striving is fruitful.

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'When I live as I please, unskillful
qualities grow and skillful qualities decline. But when I strive
painfully, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. Why
don't I strive painfully?' So that's what they do, and as they do so
unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. After some
time, they no longer strive painfully. Why is that? Because they have
accomplished the goal for which they strived painfully.

Suppose an arrowsmith was heating an arrow shaft between two firebrands,
making it straight and fit for use. After it's been made straight and
fit for use, they'd no longer heat it to make it straight and fit for
use. Why is that? Because they have accomplished the goal for which they
heated it.

In the same way, a mendicant reflects: 'When I live as I please,
unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline. But when I
strive painfully, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities
grow. Why don't I strive painfully?' ... After some time, they no longer
strive painfully. That too is how exertion and striving is fruitful.

Furthermore, a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One, and
reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings. They give up stealing. They take only what's given,
and expect only what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving. They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. They give up lying. They speak the truth
and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't trick
the world with their words. They give up divisive speech. They don't
repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people
against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided,
supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words
that promote harmony. They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way
that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite,
likable and agreeable to the people. They give up talking nonsense.
Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching
and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable,
reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. They avoid injuring plants and
seeds. They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night
and food at the wrong time. They avoid seeing shows of dancing, singing,
and music . They avoid beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. They avoid high and luxurious beds.
They avoid receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and
girls, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs,
elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and fields and land. They avoid
running errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights,
metals, or measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity;
mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they
have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss
inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, they return
from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. That too is how exertion and striving is
fruitful.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. That too is how
exertion and striving is fruitful.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' That too
is how exertion and striving is fruitful.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That too is how
exertion and striving is fruitful.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details. That too is how exertion
and striving is fruitful.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act
out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose
to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. That too is how exertion and
striving is fruitful.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' That too is how exertion and striving is fruitful. Such
is the doctrine of the Realized One. Saying this, the Realized One
deserves praise on ten legitimate grounds.

If sentient beings experience pleasure and pain because of past deeds,
clearly the Realized One has done good deeds in the past, since he now
experiences such undefiled pleasure. If sentient beings experience
pleasure and pain because of God Almighty's creation, clearly the
Realized One was created by a good God, since he now experiences such
undefiled pleasure. If sentient beings experience pleasure and pain
because of circumstance and nature, clearly the Realized One arises from
good circumstances, since he now experiences such undefiled pleasure. If
sentient beings experience pleasure and pain because of the class of
rebirth, clearly the Realized One was reborn in a good class, since he
now experiences such undefiled pleasure. If sentient beings experience
pleasure and pain because of exertion in this life, clearly the Realized
One exerts himself well in this life, since he now experiences such
undefiled pleasure.

The Realized One deserves praise whether or whether not sentient beings
experience pleasure and pain because of past deeds, or God Almighty's
creation, or circumstance and nature, or class of rebirth, or exertion
in this life. Such is the doctrine of the Realized One. Saying this, the
Realized One deserves praise on these ten legitimate grounds."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn102">

### [MN 102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Five and Three ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcattayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1844](endnotes.xhtml_note-1844){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1844
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are some ascetics and brahmins who speculate and
theorize about the future, and assert various hypotheses concerning the
future. Some propose this: 'The self is percipient and free of disease
after
death.'[1845](endnotes.xhtml_note-1845){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1845
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Some propose this: 'The self is
non-percipient and free of disease after death.' Some propose this: 'The
self is neither percipient nor non-percipient and free of disease after
death.' But some assert the annihilation, eradication, and obliteration
of an existing being, while others propose extinguishment in the present
life.[1846](endnotes.xhtml_note-1846){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1846
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Thus they assert an existent self that is
free of disease after death; or they assert the annihilation of an
existing being; while some propose extinguishment in the present life.
In this way five become three, and three become
five.[1847](endnotes.xhtml_note-1847){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1847
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the summary recital of the five and
three.

Now, the ascetics and brahmins who assert a self that is percipient and
free of disease after death describe it as having form, or being
formless, or both having form and being formless, or neither having form
nor being formless. Or they describe it as of unified perception, or of
diverse perception, or of limited perception, or of limitless
perception. Or some among those who go beyond this propose universal
consciousness, limitless and
imperturbable.[1848](endnotes.xhtml_note-1848){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1848
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Realized One understands this as follows. There are ascetics and
brahmins who assert a self that is percipient and free of disease after
death, describing it as having form, or being formless, or both having
form and being formless, or neither having form nor being formless. Or
they describe it as of unified perception, or of diverse perception, or
of limited perception, or of limitless perception. Or some, aware that
'there is nothing at all', propose the dimension of nothingness,
limitless and imperturbable. They declare that this is the purest,
highest, best, and supreme of all those perceptions, whether of form or
of formlessness or of unity or of
diversity.[1849](endnotes.xhtml_note-1849){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1849
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'That much is conditioned and crude. But
there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is
real.'[1850](endnotes.xhtml_note-1850){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1850
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Understanding this and seeing the escape
from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all that.

Now, the ascetics and brahmins who assert a self that is non-percipient
and free of disease after death describe it as having form, or being
formless, or both having form and being formless, or neither having form
nor being
formless.[1851](endnotes.xhtml_note-1851){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1851
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So they reject those who assert a self that is percipient and free of
disease after death. Why is that? Because they believe that perception
is a disease, a boil, a dart, and that the state of non-perception is
peaceful and sublime.

The Realized One understands this as follows. There are ascetics and
brahmins who assert a self that is non-percipient and free of disease
after death, describing it as having form, or being formless, or both
having form and being formless, or neither having form nor being
formless. But if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: 'Apart from
form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and
going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth,
increase, and
maturity.'[1852](endnotes.xhtml_note-1852){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1852
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That is not possible. 'All that is
conditioned and crude. But there is the cessation of conditions---*that*
is real.' Understanding this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized
One has gone beyond all that.

Now, the ascetics and brahmins who assert a self that is neither
percipient nor non-percipient and free of disease after death describe
it as having form, or being formless, or both having form and being
formless, or neither having form nor being formless.

So they reject those who assert a self that is percipient and free of
disease after death, as well as those who assert a self that is
non-percipient and free of disease after death. Why is that? Because
they believe that perception is a disease, a boil, a dart; that
non-perception is a stupor; and that the state of neither perception nor
non-perception is peaceful and
sublime.[1853](endnotes.xhtml_note-1853){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1853
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Realized One understands this as follows. There are ascetics and
brahmins who assert a self that is neither percipient nor non-percipient
and free of disease after death, describing it as having form, or being
formless, or both having form and being formless, or neither having form
nor being formless. Some ascetics or brahmins assert the embracing of
that dimension merely through the conditioned phenomena of what is able
to be seen, heard, thought, and known. But that is said to be a
disastrous
approach.[1854](endnotes.xhtml_note-1854){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1854
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For that dimension is said to be not
attainable by means of conditioned
phenomena,[1855](endnotes.xhtml_note-1855){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1855
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but only with a residue of conditioned
phenomena.[1856](endnotes.xhtml_note-1856){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1856
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'All that is conditioned and crude. But
there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is real.' Understanding
this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all
that.

Now, the ascetics and brahmins who assert the annihilation, eradication,
and obliteration of an existing being reject those who assert a self
that is free of disease after death, whether percipient or
non-percipient or neither percipient non-percipient. Why is that?
Because they think: 'All of those ascetics and brahmins only assert
their attachment to heading
upstream:[1857](endnotes.xhtml_note-1857){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1857
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "After death we shall be like this! After
death we shall be like that!"

Suppose a trader was going to market, thinking: "With this, that shall
be mine! This way, I shall get that!" In the same way, those ascetics
and brahmins seem to be like traders when they
say:[1858](endnotes.xhtml_note-1858){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1858
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "After death we shall be like this! After
death we shall be like that!"' The Realized One understands this as
follows. The ascetics and brahmins who assert the annihilation,
eradication, and obliteration of an existing being; from fear and
disgust with substantial reality, they just keep running and circling
around substantial
reality.[1859](endnotes.xhtml_note-1859){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1859
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose a dog on a leash was tethered to a
strong post or pillar. It would just keeping running and circling around
that post or
pillar.[1860](endnotes.xhtml_note-1860){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1860
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, those ascetics and
brahmins, from fear and disgust with substantial reality, just keep
running and circling around substantial reality. 'All that is
conditioned and crude. But there is the cessation of conditions---*that*
is real.' Understanding this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized
One has gone beyond all that.

Whatever ascetics and brahmins speculate and theorize about the future,
and propose various hypotheses concerning the future, all of them
propose one or other of these five
theses.[1861](endnotes.xhtml_note-1861){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1861
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past, and
propose various hypotheses concerning the past. They propose the
following, each insisting that theirs is the only truth and that
everything else is
wrong.[1862](endnotes.xhtml_note-1862){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1862
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are
eternal.'[1863](endnotes.xhtml_note-1863){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1863
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are not
eternal.'[1864](endnotes.xhtml_note-1864){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1864
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are both eternal
and not
eternal.'[1865](endnotes.xhtml_note-1865){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1865
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are neither
eternal nor not
eternal.'[1866](endnotes.xhtml_note-1866){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1866
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are
finite.'[1867](endnotes.xhtml_note-1867){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1867
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The self and the cosmos are infinite.'
'The self and the cosmos are both finite and infinite.' 'The self and
the cosmos are neither finite nor infinite.' 'The self and the cosmos
are unified in perception.' 'The self and the cosmos are diverse in
perception.' 'The self and the cosmos have limited perception.' 'The
self and the cosmos have limitless perception.' 'The self and the cosmos
experience nothing but happiness.' 'The self and the cosmos experience
nothing but suffering.' 'The self and the cosmos experience both
happiness and suffering.' 'The self and the cosmos experience neither
happiness nor suffering.'

Now, consider the ascetics and brahmins whose view is as follows. 'The
self and the cosmos are eternal. This is the only truth, anything else
is futile.' It's simply not possible for them to have personal knowledge
of this that is pure and bright, apart from faith, endorsement, oral
transmission, reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view after
deliberation. But in the absence of personal knowledge that is pure and
bright, even the portion of knowledge they illuminate is said to be
grasping on their
part.[1868](endnotes.xhtml_note-1868){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1868
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'All that is conditioned and crude. But
there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is real.' Understanding
this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all
that.

Now, consider the ascetics and brahmins whose view is as follows. The
self and the cosmos are not eternal, or both eternal and not eternal, or
neither eternal nor not-eternal, or finite, or infinite, or both finite
and infinite, or neither finite nor infinite, or of unified perception,
or of diverse perception, or of limited perception, or of limitless
perception, or experience nothing but happiness, or experience nothing
but suffering, or experience both happiness and suffering, or experience
neither happiness nor suffering. It's simply not possible for them to
have personal knowledge of this that is pure and bright, apart from
faith, endorsement, oral transmission, reasoned train of thought, or
acceptance of a view after deliberation. But in the absence of personal
knowledge that is pure and bright, even the portion of knowledge they
illuminate is said to be grasping on their part. 'All that is
conditioned and crude. But there is the cessation of conditions---*that*
is real.' Understanding this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized
One has gone beyond all that.

Now, some ascetics and brahmins, letting go of theories about the past
and the future, not fixating on the fetters of sensuality, enter and
remain in the rapture of
seclusion:[1869](endnotes.xhtml_note-1869){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1869
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is peaceful, this is sublime, that
is, entering and remaining in the rapture of seclusion.' But that
rapture of seclusion of theirs ceases. When the rapture of seclusion
ceases, sadness arises; and when sadness ceases, the rapture of
seclusion
arises.[1870](endnotes.xhtml_note-1870){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1870
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's like how the sunlight fills the space when the shadow leaves, or
the shadow fills the space when the sunshine leaves. In the same way,
when the rapture of seclusion ceases, sadness arises; and when sadness
ceases, the rapture of seclusion arises. The Realized One understands
this as follows. This good ascetic or brahmin, letting go of theories
about the past and the future, not fixating on the fetters of
sensuality, enters and remains in the rapture of seclusion: 'This is
peaceful, this is sublime, that is, entering and remaining in the
rapture of seclusion.' But that rapture of seclusion of theirs ceases.
When the rapture of seclusion ceases, sadness arises; and when sadness
ceases, the rapture of seclusion arises. 'All that is conditioned and
crude. But there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is real.'
Understanding this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized One has
gone beyond all that.

Now, some ascetics and brahmins, letting go of theories about the past
and the future, not fixating on the fetters of sensuality, going beyond
the rapture of seclusion, enter and remain in pleasure not of the
flesh.[1871](endnotes.xhtml_note-1871){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1871
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is peaceful, this is sublime, that
is, entering and remaining in pleasure not of the flesh.' But that
pleasure not of the flesh of theirs ceases. When pleasure not of the
flesh ceases, the rapture of seclusion arises; and when the rapture of
seclusion ceases, pleasure not of the flesh arises.

It's like how the sunlight fills the space when the shadow leaves, or
the shadow fills the space when the sunshine leaves. ... The Realized
One understands this as follows. This good ascetic or brahmin, letting
go of theories about the past and the future, not fixating on the
fetters of sensuality, going beyond the rapture of seclusion, enters and
remains in pleasure not of the flesh. 'This is peaceful, this is
sublime, that is, entering and remaining in pleasure not of the flesh.'
But that pleasure not of the flesh of theirs ceases. When pleasure not
of the flesh ceases, the rapture of seclusion arises; and when the
rapture of seclusion ceases, pleasure not of the flesh arises. 'All that
is conditioned and crude. But there is the cessation of
conditions---*that* is real.' Understanding this and seeing the escape
from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all that.

Now, some ascetics and brahmins, letting go of theories about the past
and the future, not fixating on the fetters of sensuality, going beyond
the rapture of seclusion and pleasure not of the flesh, enter and remain
in neutral
feeling.[1872](endnotes.xhtml_note-1872){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1872
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This is peaceful, this is sublime, that
is, entering and remaining in neutral feeling.' Then that neutral
feeling ceases. When neutral feeling ceases, pleasure not of the flesh
arises; and when pleasure not of the flesh ceases, neutral feelings
arises.

It's like how the sunlight fills the space when the shadow leaves, or
the shadow fills the space when the sunshine leaves. ... The Realized
One understands this as follows. This good ascetic or brahmin, letting
go of theories about the past and the future, not fixating on the
fetters of sensuality, going beyond the rapture of seclusion and
pleasure not of the flesh, enters and remains in neutral feeling. 'This
is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, entering and remaining in neutral
feeling.' Then that neutral feeling ceases. When neutral feeling ceases,
pleasure not of the flesh arises; and when pleasure not of the flesh
ceases, neutral feelings arises. 'All that is conditioned and crude. But
there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is real.' Understanding
this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all
that.

Now, some ascetics and brahmins, letting go of theories about the past
and the future, not fixating on the fetters of sensuality, go beyond the
rapture of seclusion, pleasure not of the flesh, and neutral feeling.
They regard themselves like this: 'I am at peace; I am quenched; I am
free of
grasping.'[1873](endnotes.xhtml_note-1873){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1873
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The Realized One understands this as follows. This good ascetic or
brahmin, letting go of theories about the past and the future, not
fixating on the fetters of sensuality, goes beyond the rapture of
seclusion, pleasure not of the flesh, and neutral feeling. They regard
themselves like this: 'I am at peace; I am quenched; I am free of
grasping.' Clearly this venerable speaks of a practice that's conducive
to
extinguishment.[1874](endnotes.xhtml_note-1874){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1874
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, they still grasp at theories
about the past or the future, or the fetters of sensuality, or the
rapture of seclusion, or pleasure not of the flesh, or neutral
feeling.[1875](endnotes.xhtml_note-1875){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1875
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And when they regard themselves like this:
'I am at peace; I am quenched; I am free of grasping,' that's also said
to be grasping on their part. 'All that is conditioned and crude. But
there is the cessation of conditions---*that* is real.' Understanding
this and seeing the escape from it, the Realized One has gone beyond all
that.

But the Realized One has awakened to the supreme state of sublime peace,
that is, liberation by not grasping after truly understanding the six
fields of contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape."[1876](endnotes.xhtml_note-1876){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1876
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn103">

### [MN 103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Is This What You Think Of Me? ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kintisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kusinārā, in the Forest of Offerings. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, is this what you think of me? 'The ascetic Gotama teaches
the Dhamma for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this
or that
state.'"[1877](endnotes.xhtml_note-1877){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1877
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No sir, we don't think of you that way."

"If you don't think of me that way, then what exactly do you think of
me?"

"We think of you this way: 'The Buddha is sympathetic and wants what's
best for us. He teaches out of sympathy.'"

"So it seems you think that I teach out of sympathy.

In that case, each and every one of you should train in the things I
have taught from my direct knowledge, that is: the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of
psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening
factors, and the noble eightfold path. You should train in these things
in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling.[1878](endnotes.xhtml_note-1878){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1878
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As you do so, it may happen that two mendicants disagree about the
teaching.

Now, you might think, 'These two venerables disagree on both the meaning
and the phrasing.' So you should approach whichever mendicant you think
is most amenable and say to
them:[1879](endnotes.xhtml_note-1879){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1879
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The venerables disagree on the meaning and
the phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is how such
disagreement on the meaning and the phrasing comes to be. Please don't
get into a dispute about this.' Then they should approach whichever
mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the
other party and say to them: 'The venerables disagree on the meaning and
the phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is how such
disagreement on the meaning and the phrasing comes to be. Please don't
get into a dispute about this.' So you should remember what has been
incorrectly memorized as incorrectly memorized and what has been
correctly memorized as correctly
memorized.[1880](endnotes.xhtml_note-1880){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1880
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Remembering this, you should speak on the
teaching and the training.

Now, you might think, 'These two venerables disagree on the meaning but
agree on the phrasing.' So you should approach whichever mendicant you
think is most amenable and say to
them:[1881](endnotes.xhtml_note-1881){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1881
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The venerables disagree on the meaning but
agree on the phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is how
such disagreement on the meaning and agreement on the phrasing comes to
be. Please don't get into a dispute about this.' Then they should
approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who
side with the other party and say to them: 'The venerables disagree on
the meaning but agree on the phrasing. But the venerables should know
that this is how such disagreement on the meaning and agreement on the
phrasing comes to be. Please don't get into a dispute about this.' So
you should remember what has been incorrectly memorized as incorrectly
memorized and what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized.
Remembering this, you should speak on the teaching and the training.

Now, you might think, 'These two venerables agree on the meaning but
disagree on the phrasing.' So you should approach whichever mendicant
you think is most amenable and say to them: 'The venerables agree on the
meaning but disagree on the phrasing. But the venerables should know
that this is how such agreement on the meaning and disagreement on the
phrasing comes to be. But the phrasing is a minor
matter.[1882](endnotes.xhtml_note-1882){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1882
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Please don't get into a dispute about
something so minor.' Then they should approach whichever mendicant they
think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say
to them: 'The venerables agree on the meaning but disagree on the
phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is how such agreement
on the meaning and disagreement on the phrasing comes to be. But the
phrasing is a minor matter. Please don't get into a dispute about
something so minor.' So you should remember what has been correctly
memorized as correctly memorized and what has been incorrectly memorized
as incorrectly memorized. Remembering this, you should speak on the
teaching and the training.

Now, you might think, 'These two venerables agree on both the meaning
and the phrasing.' So you should approach whichever mendicant you think
is most amenable and say to them: 'The venerables agree on both the
meaning and the phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is
how they come to agree on the meaning and the phrasing. Please don't get
into a dispute about this.' Then they should approach whichever
mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the
other party and say to them: 'The venerables agree on both the meaning
and the phrasing. But the venerables should know that this is how they
come to agree on the meaning and the phrasing. Please don't get into a
dispute about this.' So you should remember what has been correctly
memorized as correctly memorized. Remembering this, you should speak on
the teaching and the training.

As you train in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling,
one of the mendicants might commit an offense or
transgression.[1883](endnotes.xhtml_note-1883){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1883
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In such a case, you should not be in a
hurry to accuse them. The individual should be examined like
this:[1884](endnotes.xhtml_note-1884){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1884
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I won't be troubled and the other
individual won't be hurt, for they're not irritable and acrimonious.
They don't hold fast to their views, but let them go easily. I can draw
them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.' If
that's what you think, then it's appropriate to speak to
them.[1885](endnotes.xhtml_note-1885){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1885
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But suppose you think this: 'I will be troubled and the other individual
will be hurt, for they're irritable and acrimonious. However, they don't
hold fast to their views, but let them go easily. I can draw them away
from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. But for the
other individual to get hurt is a minor matter. It's more important that
I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the
skillful.' If that's what you think, then it's appropriate to speak to
them.

But suppose you think this: 'I will be troubled but the other individual
won't be hurt, for they're not irritable and acrimonious. However, they
hold fast to their views, refusing to let go. Nevertheless, I can draw
them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. But
for me to be troubled is a minor matter. It's more important that I can
draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.'
If that's what you think, then it's appropriate to speak to them.

But suppose you think this: 'I will be troubled and the other individual
will be hurt, for they're irritable and acrimonious. And they hold fast
to their views, refusing to let go. Nevertheless, I can draw them away
from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. But for me to be
troubled and the other individual to get hurt is a minor matter. It's
more important that I can draw them away from the unskillful and
establish them in the skillful.' If that's what you think, then it's
appropriate to speak to them.

But suppose you think this: 'I will be troubled and the other individual
will be hurt, for they're irritable and acrimonious. And they hold fast
to their views, refusing to let go. I cannot draw them away from the
unskillful and establish them in the skillful.' Don't underestimate the
value of equanimity regarding such a
person.[1886](endnotes.xhtml_note-1886){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1886
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As you train in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling,
the sides might continue to bring up settled issues with each other,
with contempt for each other's views, resentful, bitter, and
exasperated.[1887](endnotes.xhtml_note-1887){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1887
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In this case you should approach whichever
mendicant you think is most amenable among those who side with one party
and say to them: 'Reverend, as we were training, the sides continued to
bring up settled issues with each other. If the Ascetic knew about this,
would he criticize it?' Answering rightly, the mendicant should say:
'Yes, reverend, he would.' 'But without giving that up, reverend, can
one realize extinguishment?' Answering rightly, the mendicant should
say: 'No, reverend, one cannot.'

Then they should approach whichever mendicant they think is most
amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them:
'Reverend, as we were training, the sides continued to bring up settled
issues with each other. If the Ascetic knew about this, would he
criticize it?' Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: 'Yes,
reverend, he would.' 'But without giving that up, reverend, can one
realize extinguishment?' Answering rightly, the mendicant should say:
'No, reverend, one cannot.'

If others should ask that mendicant: 'Were you the venerable who drew
those mendicants away from the unskillful and established them in the
skillful?' Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: 'Well,
reverends, I approached the Buddha. He taught me the Dhamma. After
hearing that teaching I explained it to those mendicants. When those
mendicants heard that teaching they were drawn away from the unskillful
and established in the skillful.' Answering in this way, that mendicant
doesn't glorify themselves or put others down. They answer in line with
the teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn104">

### [MN 104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Sāmagāma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmagāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans near the village of Sāma.

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had recently passed
away at
Pāvā.[1888](endnotes.xhtml_note-1888){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1888
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} With his passing the Jain ascetics split,
dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling, and disputing,
continually wounding each other with barbed
words:[1889](endnotes.xhtml_note-1889){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1889
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "You don't understand this teaching and
training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand
this teaching and training? You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing
right. I stay on topic, you don't. You said last what you should have
said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you've
thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go
on, save your doctrine! You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if
you can!" You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the
Jain
ascetics.[1890](endnotes.xhtml_note-1890){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1890
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the Jain Ñātika's white-clothed lay
disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain
ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with
broken monument and without a
refuge.[1891](endnotes.xhtml_note-1891){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1891
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then, after completing the rainy season residence near Pāvā, the
novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at Sāma village. He bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him what had
happened.[1892](endnotes.xhtml_note-1892){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1892
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Ānanda said to him, "Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this
matter. Come, let's go to the Buddha and inform him about this."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda.

Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and Ānanda informed him of what Cunda had said. He went on to say, "Sir,
it occurs to me: 'When the Buddha has passed away, let no dispute arise
in the Saṅgha. For such a dispute would be for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans.'"

"What do you think, Ānanda? Do you see even two mendicants whose opinion
differs regarding the things I have taught from my direct knowledge,
that
is,[1893](endnotes.xhtml_note-1893){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1893
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five
faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble
eightfold path?"

"No, sir, I do not. Nevertheless, there are some individuals who appear
to live obedient to the Buddha, but when the Buddha has passed away they
might create a dispute in the Saṅgha regarding livelihood or the
monastic
code.[1894](endnotes.xhtml_note-1894){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1894
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such a dispute would be for the detriment
and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans."

"Ānanda, dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor
matter.[1895](endnotes.xhtml_note-1895){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1895
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But should a dispute arise in the Saṅgha
concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and
humans.[1896](endnotes.xhtml_note-1896){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1896
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Ānanda, there are these six roots of
arguments.[1897](endnotes.xhtml_note-1897){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1897
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What six? Firstly, a mendicant is irritable
and acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the
teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don't fulfill the
training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... They're devious and deceitful ... They have
corrupt wishes and wrong view ... They're attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go. Such a mendicant lacks
respect and reverence for the teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and
they don't fulfill the training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha,
which is for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If
you see such a root of arguments in yourselves or others, you should try
to give up this bad thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so
that it doesn't come up in the future. That's how to give up this bad
root of arguments, so it doesn't come up in the future. These are the
six roots of arguments.

There are four kinds of disciplinary issues. What four? Disciplinary
issues due to disputes, accusations, offenses, or
business.[1898](endnotes.xhtml_note-1898){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1898
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the four kinds of disciplinary
issues. There are seven methods for the settlement of any disciplinary
issues that might
arise.[1899](endnotes.xhtml_note-1899){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1899
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Resolution face-to-face to be applied.
Resolution through recollection to be granted. Resolution because of
past insanity to be granted. Acting according to what has been admitted.
Majority decision. Further penalty. Covering over as if with grass.

And how is there resolution face-to-face? It's when mendicants are
disputing: 'This is the teaching,' 'This is not the teaching,' 'This is
the monastic law,' 'This is not the monastic law.' Those mendicants
should all sit together in harmony and thoroughly go over the guidelines
of the
teaching.[1900](endnotes.xhtml_note-1900){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1900
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They should settle that disciplinary issue
in agreement with the guidelines. That's how there is resolution
face-to-face. And that's how certain disciplinary issues are settled,
that is, by resolution face-to-face.

And how is there majority
decision?[1901](endnotes.xhtml_note-1901){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1901
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If those mendicants are not able to settle
that issue in that
monastery,[1902](endnotes.xhtml_note-1902){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1902
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they should go to another monastery with
more mendicants. There they should all sit together in harmony and
thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. They should settle
that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. That's how
there is majority decision. And that's how certain disciplinary issues
are settled, that is, by majority decision.

And how is there resolution through recollection? It's when mendicants
accuse a mendicant of a serious offense; one entailing expulsion, or
close to it: 'Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious
offense that entails expulsion or close to it?' They say: 'No,
reverends, I don't recall committing such an
offense.'[1903](endnotes.xhtml_note-1903){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1903
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The resolution through recollection should
be granted to them. That's how there is the resolution through
recollection. And that's how certain disciplinary issues are settled,
that is, by resolution through recollection.

And how is there resolution because of past insanity? It's when a
mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of serious offense that
entails expulsion, or close to
it:[1904](endnotes.xhtml_note-1904){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1904
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Venerable, do you recall committing the
kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?' They
say: 'No, reverend, I don't recall committing such an offense.' But
though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue:
'Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing
an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!' They say: 'Reverend,
I had gone mad, I was out of my mind. And while I was mad I did and said
many things that are not proper for an ascetic. I don't remember any of
that, I was mad when I did
it.'[1905](endnotes.xhtml_note-1905){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1905
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The resolution because of past insanity
should be granted to them. That's how there is resolution because of
past insanity. And that's how certain disciplinary issues are settled,
that is, by resolution because of past insanity.

And how is there acting according to what has been admitted? It's when a
mendicant, whether accused or not, recalls an offense and clarifies it
and reveals it. After approaching a more senior mendicant, that
mendicant should arrange his robe over one shoulder, bow to that
mendicant's feet, squat on their heels, raise their joined palms, and
say:[1906](endnotes.xhtml_note-1906){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1906
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sir, I have fallen into such-and-such an
offense. I confess it.' The senior mendicant says: 'Do you see it?'
'Yes, I see it.' 'Then restrain yourself in future.' 'I shall restrain
myself.' That's how there is acting according to what has been admitted.
And that's how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, by
acting according to what has been admitted.

And how is there a verdict of further
penalty?[1907](endnotes.xhtml_note-1907){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1907
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant accuses a mendicant
of the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion, or close to it:
'Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that
entails expulsion or close to it?' They say: 'No, reverends, I don't
recall committing such an offense.' But though they try to get out of
it, the mendicants pursue the
issue:[1908](endnotes.xhtml_note-1908){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1908
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Surely the venerable must know perfectly
well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close
to it!' They say: 'Reverends, I don't recall committing a serious
offense of that nature. But I do recall committing a light offense.' But
though they try to get out of it, the mendicants pursue the issue:
'Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing
an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!' They say: 'Reverends,
I'll go so far as to acknowledge this light offense even when not asked.
Why wouldn't I acknowledge a serious offense when asked?' They say: 'You
wouldn't have acknowledged that light offense without being asked, so
why would you acknowledge a serious offense? Surely the venerable must
know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails
expulsion or close to it!' They say: 'Reverend, I do recall committing
the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it. I
spoke too hastily when I said that I didn't recall it.' That's how there
is further penalty. And that's how certain disciplinary issues are
settled, that is, by further penalty.

And how is there the covering over as if with grass? It's when the
mendicants continually argue, quarrel, and dispute, doing and saying
many things that are not proper for an ascetic. Those mendicants should
all sit together in harmony. A competent mendicant of one party, having
got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and
raised their joined palms, should inform the Saṅgha:

'Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. We have been continually arguing,
quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not
proper for an ascetic. If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then---for
the benefit of these venerables and myself---I disclose in the middle of
the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses
committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that
are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.'

Then a competent mendicant of the other party, having got up from their
seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raising their joined
palms, should inform the Saṅgha:

'Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. We have been continually arguing,
quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not
proper for an ascetic. If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then---for
the benefit of these venerables and myself---I disclose in the middle of
the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses
committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that
are gravely blameworthy and those connected with
laypeople.'[1909](endnotes.xhtml_note-1909){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1909
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That's how there is the covering over as if with grass. And that's how
certain disciplinary issues are settled, that
is,[1910](endnotes.xhtml_note-1910){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1910
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} by covering over as if with grass.

Ānanda, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without
quarreling.[1911](endnotes.xhtml_note-1911){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1911
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What six? Firstly, a mendicant consistently
treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public
and in private. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness ... This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ... This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a warm-hearted quality.

These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

If you should undertake and follow these six warm-hearted qualities, do
you see any criticism, large or small, that you could not endure?"

"No, sir."

"That's why, Ānanda, you should undertake and follow these six
warm-hearted qualities. That will be for your lasting welfare and
happiness."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn105">

### [MN 105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sunakkhatta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sunakkhattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time several mendicants had declared their enlightenment in
the Buddha's
presence:[1912](endnotes.xhtml_note-1912){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1912
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"We understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

Sunakkhatta the Licchavi heard about
this.[1913](endnotes.xhtml_note-1913){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1913
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants have declared their
enlightenment in the Buddha's presence. I trust they did so rightly---or
are there some who declared enlightenment out of
overestimation?"[1914](endnotes.xhtml_note-1914){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1914
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Some of them did so rightly, Sunakkhatta, while others did so out of
overestimation. Now, when mendicants declare enlightenment rightly, that
is their truth. But when mendicants declare enlightenment out of
overestimation, the Realized One thinks: 'I should teach them the
Dhamma.' If the Realized One thinks he should teach them the Dhamma, but
then certain futile men, having carefully planned a question, approach
the Realized One and ask it, then the Realized One changes his
mind."[1915](endnotes.xhtml_note-1915){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1915
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
teach the Dhamma. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, Sunakkhatta, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Sunakkhatta. The Buddha said this:

"Sunakkhatta, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What
five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

It's possible that a certain individual may be intent on worldly
pleasures of the flesh. Such an individual engages in pertinent
conversation, thinking and considering in line with that. They associate
with that kind of person, and they find it satisfying. But when talk
connected with the imperturbable is going on they don't want to listen.
They don't actively listen or try to understand. They don't associate
with that kind of person, and they don't find it
satisfying.[1916](endnotes.xhtml_note-1916){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1916
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose a person had left their own village or town long ago, and they
saw another person who had only recently left there. They would ask
about whether their village was safe, with plenty of food and little
disease, and the other person would tell them the news. What do you
think, Sunakkhatta? Would that person want to listen to that other
person? Would they actively listen and try to understand? Would they
associate with that person, and find it satisfying?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, it's possible that a certain individual may be intent
on worldly pleasures of the flesh. Such an individual engages in
pertinent conversation, thinking and considering in line with that. They
associate with that kind of person, and they find it satisfying. But
when talk connected with the imperturbable is going on they don't want
to listen. They don't actively listen or try to understand. They don't
associate with that kind of person, and they don't find it satisfying.
You should know of them: 'That individual is intent on pleasures of the
flesh, for they're detached from things connected with the
imperturbable.'[1917](endnotes.xhtml_note-1917){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1917
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

It's possible that a certain individual may be intent on the
imperturbable. Such an individual engages in pertinent conversation,
thinking and considering in line with that. They associate with that
kind of person, and they find it satisfying. But when talk connected
with worldly pleasures of the flesh is going on they don't want to
listen. They don't actively listen or try to understand. They don't
associate with that kind of person, and they don't find it satisfying.

Suppose there was a fallen, withered leaf. It's incapable of becoming
green again. In the same way, an individual intent on the imperturbable
has dropped the connection with worldly pleasures of the
flesh.[1918](endnotes.xhtml_note-1918){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1918
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should know of them: 'That individual
is intent on the imperturbable, for they're detached from things
connected with pleasures of the flesh.'

It's possible that a certain individual may be intent on the dimension
of nothingness. Such an individual engages in pertinent conversation,
thinking and considering in line with that. They associate with that
kind of person, and they find it
satisfying.[1919](endnotes.xhtml_note-1919){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1919
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when talk connected with the
imperturbable is going on they don't want to listen. They don't actively
listen or try to understand. They don't associate with that kind of
person, and they don't find it
satisfying.[1920](endnotes.xhtml_note-1920){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1920
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a broad rock that had been broken in half, so that it
could not be put back together again. In the same way, an individual
intent on the dimension of nothingness has broken the connection with
the imperturbable. You should know of them: 'That individual is intent
on the dimension of nothingness, for they're detached from things
connected with the imperturbable.'

It's possible that a certain individual may be intent on the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception. Such an individual engages in
pertinent conversation, thinking and considering in line with that. They
associate with that kind of person, and they find it satisfying. But
when talk connected with the dimension of nothingness is going on they
don't want to listen. They don't actively listen or try to understand.
They don't associate with that kind of person, and they don't find it
satisfying.

Suppose someone had eaten some delectable food and thrown it up. What do
you think, Sunakkhatta? Would that person want to eat that food again?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because that food is deemed repulsive."

"In the same way, an individual intent on the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception has vomited the connection with the
dimension of nothingness. You should know of them: 'That individual is
intent on the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, for
they're detached from things connected with the dimension of
nothingness.'

It's possible that a certain individual may be rightly intent on
extinguishment. Such an individual engages in pertinent conversation,
thinking and considering in line with that. They associate with that
kind of person, and they find it satisfying. But when talk connected
with the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception is going on
they don't want to listen. They don't actively listen or try to
understand. They don't associate with that kind of person, and they
don't find it satisfying.

Suppose there was a palm tree with its crown cut off. It's incapable of
further growth. In the same way, an individual rightly intent on
extinguishment has cut off the connection with the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. You should know
of them: 'That individual is rightly intent on extinguishment, for
they're detached from things connected with the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.'

It's possible that a certain mendicant might
think:[1921](endnotes.xhtml_note-1921){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1921
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'The Ascetic has said that craving is a
dart; and that the poison of ignorance is inflicted by desire and ill
will.[1922](endnotes.xhtml_note-1922){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1922
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I have given up the dart of craving and
expelled the poison of ignorance; I am rightly intent on
extinguishment.' Having such conceit, though it's not based in fact,
they would engage in things unconducive to extinguishment: unsuitable
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. Doing so, lust
infects their mind, resulting in death or deadly pain.

Suppose a man was struck by an arrow thickly smeared with poison. Their
friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to treat
them. The surgeon would cut open the wound with a scalpel, probe for the
arrow, extract it, and expel the poison, leaving some residue
behind.[1923](endnotes.xhtml_note-1923){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1923
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Imagining that no residue remained, the
surgeon would
say:[1924](endnotes.xhtml_note-1924){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1924
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'My good man, the dart has been extracted
and the poison expelled without residue. It is still capable of harming
you.[1925](endnotes.xhtml_note-1925){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1925
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Eat only suitable food. Don't eat
unsuitable food, or else the wound may get infected. Regularly wash the
wound and anoint the opening, or else it'll get covered with pus and
blood. Don't walk too much in the wind and sun, or else dust and dirt
will infect the wound. Take care of the wound, my good sir, heal it.'

They'd think: 'The dart has been extracted and the poison expelled with
no residue. It's not capable of harming
me.'[1926](endnotes.xhtml_note-1926){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1926
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They'd eat unsuitable food, and the wound
would get infected. And they wouldn't regularly wash and anoint the
opening, so it would get covered in pus and blood. And they'd walk too
much in the wind and sun, so dust and dirt infected the wound. And they
wouldn't take care of the wound or heal it. Then both because they did
what was unsuitable, and because of the residue of unclean poison, the
wound would spread, resulting in death or deadly pain.

In the same way, it's possible that a certain mendicant might think:
'The Ascetic has said that craving is a dart; and that the poison of
ignorance is inflicted by desire and ill will. I have given up the dart
of craving and expelled the poison of ignorance; I am rightly intent on
extinguishment.' Having such conceit, though it's not based in fact,
they would engage in things unconducive to extinguishment: unsuitable
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. Doing so, lust
infects their mind, resulting in death or deadly pain.

For it is death in the training of the Noble One to reject the training
and return to a lesser life. And it is deadly pain to commit one of the
corrupt offenses.

It's possible that a certain mendicant might think: 'The Ascetic has
said that craving is a dart; and that the poison of ignorance is
inflicted by desire and ill will. I have given up the dart of craving
and expelled the poison of ignorance; I am rightly intent on
extinguishment.' Being rightly intent on extinguishment, they wouldn't
engage in things unconducive to extinguishment: unsuitable sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. Doing so, lust wouldn't
infect their mind, so no death or deadly pain would result.

Suppose a man was struck by an arrow thickly smeared with poison. Their
friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would get a surgeon to treat
them. The surgeon would cut open the wound with a scalpel, probe for the
arrow, extract it, and expel the poison, leaving no residue behind.
Knowing that no residue remained, the surgeon would say: 'My good man,
the dart has been extracted and the poison expelled with no residue.
It's not capable of harming you. Eat only suitable food. Don't eat
unsuitable food, or else the wound may get infected. Regularly wash the
wound and anoint the opening, or else it'll get covered with pus and
blood. Don't walk too much in the wind and sun, or else dust and dirt
will infect the wound. Take care of the wound, my good sir, heal it.'

They'd think: 'The dart has been extracted and the poison expelled with
no residue. It's not capable of harming me.' They'd eat suitable food,
and the wound wouldn't get infected. And they'd regularly wash and
anoint the opening, so it wouldn't get covered in pus and blood. And
they wouldn't walk too much in the wind and sun, so dust and dirt
wouldn't infect the wound. And they'd take care of the wound and heal
it. Then both because they did what was suitable, and the unclean poison
had left no residue, the wound would heal, and no death or deadly pain
would result.

In the same way, it's possible that a certain mendicant might think:
'The Ascetic has said that craving is a dart; and that the poison of
ignorance is inflicted by desire and ill will. I have given up the dart
of craving and expelled the poison of ignorance; I am rightly intent on
extinguishment.' Being rightly intent on extinguishment, they wouldn't
engage in things unconducive to extinguishment: unsuitable sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. Doing so, lust wouldn't
infect their mind, so no death or deadly pain would result.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is the point: 'Wound'
is a term for the six interior sense fields. 'Poison' is a term for
ignorance. 'Dart' is a term for craving. 'Probing' is a term for
mindfulness. 'Scalpel' is a term for noble wisdom. 'Surgeon' is a term
for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

Truly, Sunakkhatta, that mendicant practices restraint regarding the six
fields of contact. Understanding that attachment is the root of
suffering, they are freed with the ending of attachments. It's not
possible that they would apply their body or interest their mind in any
attachment.[1927](endnotes.xhtml_note-1927){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1927
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a bronze cup of beverage that had a nice color, aroma,
and flavor. But it was mixed with poison. Then a person would come along
who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to be happy and
recoils from pain. What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Would that person
drink that beverage if they knew that it would result in death or deadly
suffering?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, Sunakkhatta, that mendicant practices restraint
regarding the six fields of contact. Understanding that attachment is
the root of suffering, they are freed with the ending of attachments.
It's not possible that they would apply their body or interest their
mind in any attachment.

Suppose there was a lethal viper. Then a person would come along who
wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils
from pain. What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Would that person give that
lethal viper their hand or finger if they knew that it would result in
death or deadly suffering?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, Sunakkhatta, that mendicant practices restraint
regarding the six fields of contact. Understanding that attachment is
the root of suffering, they are freed with the ending of attachments.
It's not possible that they would apply their body or interest their
mind in any attachment."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Sunakkhatta of the Licchavi
clan approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn106">

### [MN 106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Conducive to the Imperturbable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āneñjasappāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1928](endnotes.xhtml_note-1928){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1928
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, sensual pleasures are impermanent, hollow, false, and
deceptive. This is made by illusion, mendicants, lamented by
fools.[1929](endnotes.xhtml_note-1929){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1929
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sensual pleasures in this life and in lives
to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to come; both of
these are Māra's domain, Māra's realm, and Māra's territory. They
conduce to bad, unskillful qualities such as desire, ill will, and
aggression. And they create an obstacle for a noble disciple training
here.

A noble disciple reflects on this: 'Sensual pleasures in this life and
in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to come;
both of these are Māra's domain, Māra's realm, and Māra's territory.
They conduce to bad, unskillful qualities such as desire, ill will, and
aggression. And they create an obstacle for a noble disciple training
here. Why don't I meditate with an abundant, expansive heart, having
mastered the world and stabilized the mind? Then I will have no more
bad, unskillful qualities such as desire, ill will, and aggression. And
by giving them up my mind, no longer limited, will become limitless and
well developed.'

Practicing in this way and meditating on it often their mind becomes
confident in this dimension. Being confident, they either attain the
imperturbable now, or are freed by
wisdom.[1930](endnotes.xhtml_note-1930){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1930
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When their body breaks up, after death,
it's possible that that conducive consciousness will be reborn in the
imperturbable.[1931](endnotes.xhtml_note-1931){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1931
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is said to be the first way of
practice suitable for attaining the imperturbable.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'Sensual pleasures in this life
and in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to
come; whatever form there is, all form is the four principal states, or
form derived from the four principal states.' Practicing in this way and
meditating on it often their mind becomes confident in this dimension.
Being confident, they either attain the imperturbable now, or are freed
by wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's possible that
that conducive consciousness will be reborn in the imperturbable. This
is said to be the second way of practice suitable for attaining the
imperturbable.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'Sensual pleasures in this life
and in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to
come, visions in this life and in lives to
come,[1932](endnotes.xhtml_note-1932){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1932
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} perceptions of visions in this life and in
lives to come; all of these are impermanent. And what's impermanent is
not worth approving, welcoming, or clinging to.' Practicing in this way
and meditating on it often their mind becomes confident in this
dimension. Being confident, they either attain the imperturbable now, or
are freed by wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's
possible that that conducive consciousness will be reborn in the
imperturbable. This is said to be the third way of practice suitable for
attaining the imperturbable.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'Sensual pleasures in this life
and in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to
come, visions in this life and in lives to come, perceptions of visions
in this life and in lives to come, and perceptions of the imperturbable;
all are perceptions. Where they cease without anything left over, that
is peaceful, that is sublime, namely the dimension of
nothingness.'[1933](endnotes.xhtml_note-1933){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1933
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Practicing in this way and meditating on it
often their mind becomes confident in this dimension. Being confident,
they either attain the dimension of nothingness now, or are freed by
wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's possible that that
conducive consciousness will be reborn in the dimension of nothingness.
This is said to be the first way of practice suitable for attaining the
dimension of nothingness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has gone to a wilderness, or to the root
of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this: 'This is empty of
a self or what belongs to a self.' Practicing in this way and meditating
on it often their mind becomes confident in this dimension. Being
confident, they either attain the dimension of nothingness now, or are
freed by wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's possible
that that conducive consciousness will be reborn in the dimension of
nothingness. This is said to be the second way of practice suitable for
attaining the dimension of nothingness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'I don't belong to anyone
anywhere! And nothing belongs to me
anywhere!'[1934](endnotes.xhtml_note-1934){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1934
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Practicing in this way and meditating on it
often their mind becomes confident in this dimension. Being confident,
they either attain the dimension of nothingness now, or are freed by
wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's possible that that
conducive consciousness will be reborn in the dimension of nothingness.
This is said to be the third way of practice suitable for attaining the
dimension of nothingness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'Sensual pleasures in this life
and in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this life and in lives to
come, visions in this life and in lives to come, perceptions of visions
in this life and in lives to come, perceptions of the imperturbable, and
perceptions of the dimension of nothingness; all are perceptions. Where
they cease without anything left over, that is peaceful, that is
sublime, namely the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.'
Practicing in this way and meditating on it often their mind becomes
confident in this dimension. Being confident, they either attain the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception now, or are freed by
wisdom. When their body breaks up, after death, it's possible that that
conducive consciousness will be reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is said to be the way of practice
suitable for attaining the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha: "Sir, take a
mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might not be
mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up what
exists, what has come to
be.'[1935](endnotes.xhtml_note-1935){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1935
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In this way they gain equanimity. Would
that mendicant become extinguished or not?"

"One such mendicant might become extinguished, Ānanda, while another
might not."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason for this?"

"Ānanda, take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and
it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am
giving up what exists, what has come to be.' In this way they gain
equanimity. They approve, welcome, and keep clinging to that equanimity.
Their consciousness has that as support and fuel for grasping. A
mendicant with fuel for grasping does not become extinguished."

"But sir, what is that mendicant grasping?"

"The dimension of neither perception nor non-perception."

"Sir, it seems that mendicant is grasping the best thing to grasp!"

"Indeed, Ānanda. For the best thing to grasp is the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up
what exists, what has come to be.' In this way they gain equanimity.
They don't approve, welcome, or keep clinging to that equanimity. So
their consciousness doesn't have that as support and fuel for grasping.
A mendicant free of grasping becomes extinguished."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! It seems the Buddha has explained
to us how to cross over the flood by relying on one support or
another.[1936](endnotes.xhtml_note-1936){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1936
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But sir, what is noble liberation?"

"Ānanda, it's when a noble disciple reflects like this: 'Sensual
pleasures in this life and in lives to come, sensual perceptions in this
life and in lives to come, visions in this life and in lives to come,
perceptions of visions in this life and in lives to come, perceptions of
the imperturbable, perceptions of the dimension of nothingness,
perceptions of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception;
that is substantial reality as far as substantial reality extends. But
this is freedom from death, namely the liberation of the mind through
not grasping.

So, Ānanda, I have taught the ways of practice suitable for attaining
the imperturbable, the dimension of nothingness, and the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. I have taught how to cross the
flood by relying on one support or another, and I have taught noble
liberation.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, Ānanda! Don't be negligent! Don't
regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn107">

### [MN 107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Moggallāna the Accountant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gaṇakamoggallānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery. Then the brahmin Moggallāna the Accountant went up to the
Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, in this stilt longhouse we can see gradual progress down
to the last step of the
staircase.[1937](endnotes.xhtml_note-1937){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1937
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Among the brahmins we can see gradual
progress in
recitation.[1938](endnotes.xhtml_note-1938){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1938
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Among archers we can see gradual progress
in
archery.[1939](endnotes.xhtml_note-1939){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1939
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Among us accountants, who earn a living by
accounting, we can see gradual progress in
mathematics.[1940](endnotes.xhtml_note-1940){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1940
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For when we get an apprentice we first make
them count: 'One one, two twos, three threes, four fours, five fives,
six sixes, seven sevens, eight eights, nine nines, ten
tens.'[1941](endnotes.xhtml_note-1941){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1941
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We even make them count up to a hundred. Is
it possible to similarly describe a gradual training, gradual progress,
and gradual practice in this teaching and training?"

"It is possible, brahmin. Suppose a deft horse trainer were to obtain a
fine thoroughbred. First of all he'd make it get used to wearing the
bit.[1942](endnotes.xhtml_note-1942){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1942
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, when the Realized One gets
a person for training they first guide them like this: 'Come, mendicant,
be ethical and restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well
and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, keep the rules you've undertaken.'

When they have ethical conduct, the Realized One guides them further:
'Come, mendicant, guard your sense doors. When you see a sight with your
eyes, don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice
restraint, protect the faculty of sight, and achieve restraint over it.
When you hear a sound with your ears ... When you smell an odor with
your nose ... When you taste a flavor with your tongue ... When you feel
a touch with your body ... When you know an idea with your mind, don't
get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were
left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice
restraint, protect the faculty of mind, and achieve its restraint.'

When they guard their sense doors, the Realized One guides them further:
'Come, mendicant, eat in moderation. Reflect rationally on the food that
you eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to
sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In
this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new
discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and
a comfortable abiding.'

When they eat in moderation, the Realized One guides them further:
'Come, mendicant, be committed to wakefulness. Practice walking and
sitting meditation by day, purifying your mind from obstacles. In the
first watch of the night, continue to practice walking and sitting
meditation. In the middle watch, lie down in the lion's posture---on the
right side, placing one foot on top of the other---mindful and aware,
and focused on the time of getting up. In the last watch, get up and
continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying your mind
from obstacles.'

When they are committed to wakefulness, the Realized One guides them
further: 'Come, mendicant, have mindfulness and situational awareness.
Act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.'

When they have mindfulness and situational awareness, the Realized One
guides them further: 'Come, mendicant, frequent a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.' And they do
so.

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set
their body straight, and establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving
up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness.

That's how I instruct the mendicants who are trainees---who haven't
achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme
sanctuary from the
yoke.[1943](endnotes.xhtml_note-1943){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1943
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But for those mendicants who are
perfected---who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are
rightly freed through enlightenment---these things lead to blissful
meditation in the present life, and to mindfulness and awareness."

When he had spoken, Moggallāna the Accountant said to the Buddha, "When
his disciples are instructed and advised like this by Mister Gotama, do
all of them achieve the ultimate goal, extinguishment, or do some of
them fail?"

"Some succeed, while others fail."

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why, though
extinguishment is present, the path leading to extinguishment is
present, and Mister Gotama is present to encourage them, still some
succeed while others fail?"

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? Are you skilled in the
road to
Rājagaha?"[1944](endnotes.xhtml_note-1944){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1944
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, I am."

"What do you think, brahmin? Suppose a person was to come along who
wanted to go to Rājagaha. He'd approach you and say: 'Sir, I wish to go
to Rājagaha. Please point out the road to Rājagaha.' You'd say to them:
'Here, mister, this road goes to Rājagaha. Go along it for an hour, and
you'll see a certain village. Go along an hour further, and you'll see a
certain town. Go along an hour further and you'll see Rājagaha with its
delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds.' Instructed like this
by you, they might still take the wrong road, heading
west.[1945](endnotes.xhtml_note-1945){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1945
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But a second person might come with the
same question and receive the same instructions. Instructed by you, they
might safely arrive at Rājagaha. What is the cause, brahmin, what is the
reason why, though Rājagaha is present, the path leading to Rājagaha is
present, and you are there to encourage them, one person takes the wrong
path and heads west, while another arrives safely at Rājagaha?"

"What can I do about that, Mister Gotama? I am the one who shows the
way."[1946](endnotes.xhtml_note-1946){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1946
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In the same way, though extinguishment is present, the path leading to
extinguishment is present, and I am present to encourage them, still
some of my disciples, instructed and advised like this, achieve the
ultimate goal, extinguishment, while some of them fail. What can I do
about that, brahmin? The Realized One is the one who shows the way."

When he had spoken, Moggallāna the Accountant said to the Buddha,
"Mister Gotama, there are those faithless people who went forth from the
lay life to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood.
They're devious, deceitful, and sneaky. They're restless, insolent,
fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued. They do not guard their sense
doors or eat in moderation, and they are not committed to wakefulness.
They don't care about the ascetic life, and don't keenly respect the
training. They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion, lazy, and lacking energy. They're unmindful,
lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds,
witless and stupid. Mister Gotama does not live together with
these.[1947](endnotes.xhtml_note-1947){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1947
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But there are those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness out of faith. They're not devious, deceitful, and sneaky.
They're not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued.
They guard their sense doors and eat in moderation, and they are
committed to wakefulness. They care about the ascetic life, and keenly
respect the training. They're not indulgent or slack, nor are they
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They're energetic and
determined. They're mindful, with situational awareness, immersion, and
unified minds; wise, not stupid. Mister Gotama does live together with
these.

Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. Of all
kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. Of
all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the
same way, Mister Gotama's advice is the best of contemporary teachings.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn108">

### [MN 108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Moggallāna the Guardian ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gopakamoggallānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. It was not
long after the Buddha had become fully quenched.

Now at that time King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of
Videha, being suspicious of King Pajjota, was having Rājagaha
fortified.[1948](endnotes.xhtml_note-1948){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1948
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.
Why don't I go to see the brahmin Moggallāna the Guardian at his place
of work?"

So that's what he did. Moggallāna the Guardian saw Ānanda coming off in
the distance and said to him, "Come, Mister Ānanda! Welcome, Mister
Ānanda! It's been a long time since you took the opportunity to come
here. Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready."

Ānanda sat down on the seat spread out, while Moggallāna took a low seat
and sat to one side. Then he said to Ānanda, "Mister Ānanda, is there
even a single mendicant who has all the same qualities in each and every
way as possessed by Mister Gotama, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha?"

"No, brahmin, there is not. For the Blessed One gave rise to the
unarisen path, gave birth to the unborn path, and explained the
unexplained path. He is the knower of the path, the discoverer of the
path, the expert on the
path.[1949](endnotes.xhtml_note-1949){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1949
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And now the disciples live following the
path; they acquire it later."

But this conversation between Ānanda and Moggallāna the Guardian was
left unfinished.

For just then the brahmin Vassakāra, a minister of Magadha, while
supervising the work at Rājagaha, approached Ānanda at Moggallāna's
place of work and exchanged greetings with
him.[1950](endnotes.xhtml_note-1950){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1950
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda, "Mister Ānanda,
what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"

So Ānanda told him of the conversation that they were having when
Vassakāra arrived. Vassakāra said:

"Mister Ānanda, is there even a single mendicant who was appointed by
Mister Gotama, saying: 'This one will be your refuge when I have passed
away,' to whom you would now
turn?"[1951](endnotes.xhtml_note-1951){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1951
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, there is
not."[1952](endnotes.xhtml_note-1952){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1952
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But is there even a single mendicant who has been elected to such a
position by the Saṅgha and appointed by several senior
mendicants?"[1953](endnotes.xhtml_note-1953){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1953
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, there is not."

"But since you lack a refuge, Mister Ānanda, what's the reason for your
harmony?"[1954](endnotes.xhtml_note-1954){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1954
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"We don't lack a refuge, brahmin, we have a refuge. The teaching is our
refuge."[1955](endnotes.xhtml_note-1955){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1955
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But Mister Ānanda, when asked whether there was even a single
mendicant---either appointed by the Buddha, or elected by the Saṅgha and
appointed by several senior mendicants---who serves as your refuge after
the Buddha passed away, to whom you now turn, you replied, 'No, there is
not.' But you say that the reason for your harmony is that you have the
teaching as a refuge. How should I see the meaning of this statement?"

"The Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha laid down training rules and recited the monastic code
for the
mendicants.[1956](endnotes.xhtml_note-1956){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1956
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} On the day of the sabbath all of us who
live in dependence on one village district gather together as
one.[1957](endnotes.xhtml_note-1957){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1957
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We invite one who transmits the code to
recite
it.[1958](endnotes.xhtml_note-1958){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1958
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If anyone remembers an offense or
transgression while they're reciting, we make them act in line with the
teachings and in line with the
instructions.[1959](endnotes.xhtml_note-1959){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1959
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's not the good sirs who make us act,
it's the teaching that makes us
act."[1960](endnotes.xhtml_note-1960){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1960
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mister Ānanda, is there even a single mendicant who you honor, respect,
revere, venerate, and rely on?"

"There is not,
brahmin."[1961](endnotes.xhtml_note-1961){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1961
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mister Ānanda, when asked whether there was even a single
mendicant---either appointed by the Buddha, or elected by the Saṅgha and
appointed by several senior mendicants---who serves as your refuge after
the Buddha passed away, to whom you now turn, you replied, 'No, there is
not.' And when asked whether there is even a single mendicant who you
honor, respect, revere, venerate, and rely on, you replied, 'There is
not.' How should I see the meaning of this statement?"

"There are ten inspiring things explained by the Blessed One, who knows
and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha.[1962](endnotes.xhtml_note-1962){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1962
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} We honor anyone in whom these things are
found. What ten?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're content with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They
control the body as far as the Brahmā realm.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in samādhi ... mind
not immersed in samādhi ... freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind
as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

These are the ten inspiring things explained by the Blessed One, who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. We honor
anyone in whom these things are found, and rely on
them."[1963](endnotes.xhtml_note-1963){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1963
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Vassakāra addressed General
Upananda,[1964](endnotes.xhtml_note-1964){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1964
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "What do you think,
general?[1965](endnotes.xhtml_note-1965){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1965
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Do these venerables honor, respect, revere,
and venerate those who are worthy?"

"Indeed they do. For if these venerables were not to honor, respect,
revere, and venerate them, then who exactly would they honor?"

Then Vassakāra said to Ānanda, "Where are you staying at present?"

"In the Bamboo Grove, brahmin."

"I hope the Bamboo Grove is delightful, quiet and still, far from the
madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat?"

"Indeed it is, brahmin. And it is like that owing to such protectors and
guardians as
yourself."[1966](endnotes.xhtml_note-1966){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1966
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Surely, Mister Ānanda, it is owing to the good sirs who meditate,
making a habit of
meditating.[1967](endnotes.xhtml_note-1967){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1967
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the good sirs do in fact meditate and
make a habit of meditating.

This one time, Mister Ānanda, Mister Gotama was staying near Vesālī, at
the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. So I went there to see
him. And there he spoke about meditation in many ways. He meditated, and
made a habit of meditating. And he praised all kinds of meditation."

"No, brahmin, the Buddha did not praise all kinds of meditation, nor did
he dispraise all kinds of meditation. And what kind of meditation did he
not praise? It's when someone's heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire, and they don't truly understand the escape from sensual desire
that has arisen. Hiding sensual desire within, they meditate and
concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. Their heart is overcome and
mired in ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and
remorse ... doubt, and they don't truly know and see the escape from
doubt that has arisen. Hiding doubt within, they meditate and
concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. The Buddha didn't praise this
kind of meditation.

And what kind of meditation did he praise? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. The Buddha praised this kind of meditation."

"Well, Mister Ānanda, it seems that Mister Gotama criticized the kind of
meditation that deserves criticism and praised that deserving of
praise.[1968](endnotes.xhtml_note-1968){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1968
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Well, now, Mister Ānanda, I must go. I have
many duties, and much to do."

"Please, brahmin, go at your convenience."

Then Vassakāra the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what
Venerable Ānanda said, got up from his seat and left.

Soon after he had left, Moggallāna the Guardian said to Ānanda, "Mister
Ānanda, you still haven't answered my question."

"But brahmin, didn't I say: 'There is no single mendicant who has all
the same qualities in each and every way as possessed by Mister Gotama,
the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha.[1969](endnotes.xhtml_note-1969){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1969
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For the Blessed One gave rise to the
unarisen path, gave birth to the unborn path, and explained the
unexplained path. He is the knower of the path, the discoverer of the
path, the expert on the path. And now the disciples live following the
path; they acquire it
later.'"[1970](endnotes.xhtml_note-1970){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1970
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn109">

### [MN 109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on the Full-Moon Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāpuṇṇamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.[1971](endnotes.xhtml_note-1971){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1971
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, at that time it was the sabbath---the full moon on the fifteenth
day---and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of
monks.

Then one of the mendicants got up from their seat, arranged their robe
over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and
said, "I'd like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you'd take
the time to
answer."[1972](endnotes.xhtml_note-1972){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1972
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, mendicant, take your own seat and ask what you wish."

That mendicant took his seat and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates: form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness?"

"Yes, they are," replied the Buddha.

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?"

"These five grasping aggregates are rooted in
desire."[1973](endnotes.xhtml_note-1973){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1973
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping
aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates
another?"

"Neither. The desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates is the
grasping
there."[1974](endnotes.xhtml_note-1974){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1974
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five
grasping aggregates?"

"There can," said the Buddha. "It's when someone thinks: 'In the future,
may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, and
such
consciousness!'[1975](endnotes.xhtml_note-1975){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1975
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how there can be different kinds of
desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates."

"Sir, what is the scope of the term 'aggregates' as applied to the
aggregates?"

"Any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is
called the aggregate of form. Any kind of feeling at all ... Any kind of
perception at all ... Any kind of choices at all ... Any kind of
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the
aggregate of consciousness. That's the scope of the term 'aggregates' as
applied to the
aggregates."[1976](endnotes.xhtml_note-1976){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1976
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is
found?[1977](endnotes.xhtml_note-1977){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1977
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What is the cause, what is the reason why
the aggregate of feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness is
found?"

"The four principal states are the reason why the aggregate of form is
found. Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling
...[1978](endnotes.xhtml_note-1978){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1978
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} perception
...[1979](endnotes.xhtml_note-1979){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1979
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and choices are
found.[1980](endnotes.xhtml_note-1980){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1980
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Name and form are the reasons why the
aggregate of consciousness is
found."[1981](endnotes.xhtml_note-1981){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1981
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how does substantialist view come
about?"[1982](endnotes.xhtml_note-1982){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1982
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and
is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the true persons. They regard form as self, self as
having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard feeling as self,
self as having feeling, feeling in self, or self in feeling. They regard
perception as self, self as having perception, perception in self, or
self in perception. They regard choices as self, self as having choices,
choices in self, or self in choices. They regard consciousness as self,
self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness. That's how substantialist view comes
about."[1983](endnotes.xhtml_note-1983){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1983
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how does substantialist view not come about?"

"It's when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is
skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true
persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true
persons. They don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in
self, or self in form. They don't regard feeling as self, self as having
feeling, feeling in self, or self in feeling. They don't regard
perception as self, self as having perception, perception in self, or
self in perception. They don't regard choices as self, self as having
choices, choices in self, or self in choices. They don't regard
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness. That's how substantialist view does not
come
about."[1984](endnotes.xhtml_note-1984){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1984
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, what's the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it
comes to
form,[1985](endnotes.xhtml_note-1985){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1985
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness?"

"The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its
gratification. That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this
is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this
is its escape. The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness: this is its gratification.
That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is
its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness:
this is its escape."

"Sir, how does one know and see so that there's no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body
and all external
stimuli?"[1986](endnotes.xhtml_note-1986){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1986
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"One truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present;
internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or
near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' One truly sees any kind of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near, *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' That's how to know and
see so that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli."

Now at that time one of the mendicants had the thought, "So it seems,
good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
not-self. Then what self will the deeds done by not-self
affect?"[1987](endnotes.xhtml_note-1987){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1987
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But the Buddha, knowing that mendicant's train of thought, addressed the
mendicants: "It's possible that some futile person here---unknowing and
ignorant, their mind dominated by craving---thinks they can overstep the
teacher's instructions. They think: 'So it seems, good sir, that form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. Then what
self will the deeds done by not-self affect?' Now, mendicants, you have
been educated by me in questioning with regard to all these things in
all such
cases.[1988](endnotes.xhtml_note-1988){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1988
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Is feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.'

You should truly see any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of
sixty mendicants were freed from defilements by not grasping.

</article>
<article id="mn110">

### [MN 110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on the Full-Moon Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷapuṇṇamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath---the full moon on the fifteenth
day---and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of
monks. Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants, who were
so very silent. He addressed them, "Mendicants, could an untrue person
know of an untrue
person:[1989](endnotes.xhtml_note-1989){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1989
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This fellow is an untrue person'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! It's impossible, it can't happen, that an untrue
person could know of an untrue person: 'This fellow is an untrue
person.' But could an untrue person know of a true person: 'This fellow
is a true person'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! That too is impossible. A untrue person has bad
qualities, is devoted to untrue persons, and has the intentions,
counsel, speech, actions, views, and giving of an untrue
person.[1990](endnotes.xhtml_note-1990){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1990
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how does an untrue person have bad qualities? It's when an untrue
person is faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful,
and witless. That's how an untrue person has bad qualities.

And how is an untrue person devoted to untrue persons? It's when an
untrue person is a friend and companion of ascetics and brahmins who are
faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless.[1991](endnotes.xhtml_note-1991){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1991
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how an untrue person is devoted to
untrue persons.

And how does an untrue person have the intentions of an untrue person?
It's when an untrue person intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and
hurt both. That's how an untrue person has the intentions of an untrue
person.

And how does an untrue person offer the counsel of an untrue person?
It's when an untrue person offers counsel that hurts themselves, hurts
others, and hurts both. That's how an untrue person offers the counsel
of an untrue person.

And how does an untrue person have the speech of an untrue person? It's
when an untrue person uses speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. That's how an untrue person has the speech of an untrue
person.

And how does an untrue person have the action of an untrue person? It's
when an untrue person kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual
misconduct. That's how an untrue person has the actions of an untrue
person.

And how does an untrue person have the view of an untrue person? It's
when an untrue person has such a view: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.'
That's how an untrue person has the view of an untrue person.

And how does an untrue person give the gifts of an untrue
person?[1992](endnotes.xhtml_note-1992){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1992
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when an untrue person gives a gift
carelessly, not with their own hand, and thoughtlessly. They give the
dregs, and they give without consideration for consequences. That's how
an untrue person gives the gifts of an untrue person.

That untrue person---who has such bad qualities, frequents untrue
persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and
giving of an untrue person---when their body breaks up, after death, is
reborn in the place where untrue persons are reborn. And what is the
place where untrue persons are reborn? Hell or the animal
realm.[1993](endnotes.xhtml_note-1993){#mn-uparipannasa.xhtml_noteref-1993
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants, could a true person know of a true person: 'This fellow is a
true person'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! It is possible that a true person could know of a
true person: 'This fellow is a true person.' But could a true person
know of an untrue person: 'This fellow is an untrue person'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! That too is possible. A true person has good
qualities, is devoted to true persons, and has the intentions, counsel,
speech, actions, views, and giving of a true person.

And how does a true person have good qualities? It's when a true person
is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and
wise. That's how a true person has good qualities.

And how is a true person devoted to true persons? It's when a true
person is a friend and companion of ascetics and brahmins who are
faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.
That's how a true person is devoted to true persons.

And how does a true person have the intentions of a true person? It's
when a true person doesn't intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and
hurt both. That's how a true person has the intentions of a true person.

And how does a true person offer the counsel of a true person? It's when
a true person offers counsel that doesn't hurt themselves, hurt others,
and hurt both. That's how a true person offers the counsel of a true
person.

And how does a true person have the speech of a true person? It's when a
true person refrains from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. That's how a true person has the speech of a true person.

And how does a true person have the action of a true person? It's when a
true person refrains from killing living creatures, stealing, and
committing sexual misconduct. That's how a true person has the action of
a true person.

And how does a true person have the view of a true person? It's when a
true person has such a view: 'There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and
offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is
an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings
that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who
are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the
afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' That's how a true
person has the view of a true person.

And how does a true person give the gifts of a true person? It's when a
true person gives a gift carefully, with their own hand, and
thoughtfully. They don't give the dregs, and they give with
consideration for consequences. That's how a true person gives the gifts
of a true person.

That true person---who has such good qualities, is devoted to true
persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and
giving of a true person---when their body breaks up, after death, is
reborn in the place where true persons are reborn. And what is the place
where true persons are reborn? A state of greatness among gods or
humans."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter Beginning with One By One {#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_mn-anupadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn111">

### [MN 111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One by One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[1994](endnotes.xhtml_note-1994){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1994
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Sāriputta is astute, mendicants. He has great
wisdom,[1995](endnotes.xhtml_note-1995){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1995
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} widespread
wisdom,[1996](endnotes.xhtml_note-1996){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1996
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} laughing wisdom, swift wisdom, sharp
wisdom, and penetrating wisdom. For a fortnight he practiced discernment
of phenomena one by
one.[1997](endnotes.xhtml_note-1997){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1997
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this is how he did it.

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, he entered and remained in the first absorption, which has
the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And he distinguished the phenomena of the first
absorption one by one: placing and keeping and rapture and bliss and
unification of mind; contact, feeling, perception, intention, mind,
enthusiasm, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and application
of
mind.[1998](endnotes.xhtml_note-1998){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1998
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He knew those phenomena as they arose, as
they remained, and as they went
away.[1999](endnotes.xhtml_note-1999){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-1999
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He understood: 'So it seems that these
phenomena, not having been, come to be; and having come to be, they flit
away.'[2000](endnotes.xhtml_note-2000){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2000
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Regarding those phenomena, he meditated
without going near or going away, independent, untied, liberated,
detached, his mind free of
limits.[2001](endnotes.xhtml_note-2001){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2001
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He understood: 'There is an escape
beyond.'[2002](endnotes.xhtml_note-2002){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2002
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Repeated practice of that confirmed this
for
him.[2003](endnotes.xhtml_note-2003){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2003
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were
stilled, he entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

And he distinguished the phenomena of the second absorption one by one:
internal confidence and rapture and bliss and unification of mind;
contact, feeling, perception, intention, mind, enthusiasm, decision,
energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and application of
mind.[2004](endnotes.xhtml_note-2004){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2004
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He knew those phenomena as they arose, as
they remained, and as they went away. He understood: 'So it seems that
these phenomena, not having been, come to be; and having come to be,
they flit away.' Regarding those phenomena, he meditated without going
near or going away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, his mind
free of limits. He understood: 'There is an escape beyond.' Repeated
practice of that confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, he entered and remained in
the third absorption, where he meditated with equanimity, mindful and
aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.'

And he distinguished the phenomena of the third absorption one by one:
bliss and mindfulness and awareness and unification of mind; contact,
feeling, perception, intention, mind, enthusiasm, decision, energy,
mindfulness, equanimity, and application of mind. He knew those
phenomena as they arose, as they remained, and as they went away. He
understood: 'So it seems that these phenomena, not having been, come to
be; and having come to be, they flit away.' Regarding those phenomena,
he meditated without going near or going away, independent, untied,
liberated, detached, his mind free of limits. He understood: 'There is
an escape beyond.' Repeated practice of that confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of
former happiness and sadness, he entered and remained in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.

And he distinguished the phenomena of the fourth absorption one by one:
equanimity and neutral feeling and mental unconcern due to tranquility
and pure mindfulness and unification of mind; contact, feeling,
perception, intention, mind, enthusiasm, decision, energy, mindfulness,
equanimity, and application of
mind.[2005](endnotes.xhtml_note-2005){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2005
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He knew those phenomena as they arose, as
they remained, and as they went away. He understood: 'So it seems that
these phenomena, not having been, come to be; and having come to be,
they flit away.' Regarding those phenomena, he meditated without going
near or going away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, his mind
free of limits. He understood: 'There is an escape beyond.' Repeated
practice of that confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending
of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', he entered and remained in the dimension
of infinite space.

And he distinguished the phenomena of the dimension of infinite space
one by one: the perception of the dimension of infinite space and
unification of mind; contact, feeling, perception, intention, mind,
enthusiasm, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and application
of mind. He knew those phenomena as they arose, as they remained, and as
they went away. He understood: 'So it seems that these phenomena, not
having been, come to be; and having come to be, they flit away.'
Regarding those phenomena, he meditated without going near or going
away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, his mind free of limits.
He understood: 'There is an escape beyond.' Repeated practice of that
confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite', he entered and remained in the
dimension of infinite consciousness.

And he distinguished the phenomena of the dimension of infinite
consciousness one by one: the perception of the dimension of infinite
consciousness and unification of mind; contact, feeling, perception,
intention, mind, enthusiasm, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity,
and application of mind. He knew those phenomena as they arose, as they
remained, and as they went away. He understood: 'So it seems that these
phenomena, not having been, come to be; and having come to be, they flit
away.' Regarding those phenomena, he meditated without going near or
going away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, his mind free of
limits. He understood: 'There is an escape beyond.' Repeated practice of
that confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', he entered and
remained in the dimension of nothingness.

And he distinguished the phenomena of the dimension of nothingness one
by one: the perception of the dimension of nothingness and unification
of mind; contact, feeling, perception, intention, mind, enthusiasm,
decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and application of mind. He
knew those phenomena as they arose, as they remained, and as they went
away. He understood: 'So it seems that these phenomena, not having been,
come to be; and having come to be, they flit away.' Regarding those
phenomena, he meditated without going near or going away, independent,
untied, liberated, detached, his mind free of limits. He understood:
'There is an escape beyond.' Repeated practice of that confirmed this
for him.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, he
entered and remained in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.

And he emerged from that attainment with mindfulness. Then he
contemplated the phenomena of that attainment that had passed, ceased,
and perished: 'So it seems that these phenomena, not having been, come
to be; and having come to be, they flit
away.'[2006](endnotes.xhtml_note-2006){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2006
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Regarding those phenomena, he meditated
without going near or going away, independent, untied, liberated,
detached, his mind free of limits. He understood: 'There is an escape
beyond.' Repeated practice of that confirmed this for him.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, he entered and remained in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, his defilements
came to an end.

And he emerged from that attainment with mindfulness. Then he
contemplated the phenomena of that attainment that had passed, ceased,
and perished: 'So it seems that these phenomena, not having been, come
to be; and having come to be, they flit
away.'[2007](endnotes.xhtml_note-2007){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2007
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Regarding those phenomena, he meditated
without going near or going away, independent, untied, liberated,
detached, his mind free of limits. He understood: 'There is no escape
beyond.'[2008](endnotes.xhtml_note-2008){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2008
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} By cultivating that he confirmed that there
is not.

And if there's anyone of whom it may be rightly said that they have
attained mastery and perfection in noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and
freedom, it's
Sāriputta.[2009](endnotes.xhtml_note-2009){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2009
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And if there's anyone of whom it may be rightly said that they're the
Buddha's true-born son, born from his mouth, born of the teaching,
created by the teaching, heir to the teaching, not the heir in things of
the flesh, it's
Sāriputta.[2010](endnotes.xhtml_note-2010){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2010
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was
rolled forth by the Realized
One."[2011](endnotes.xhtml_note-2011){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2011
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn112">

### [MN 112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Sixfold Purification ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chabbisodhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2012](endnotes.xhtml_note-2012){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2012
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take a mendicant who declares enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."'

You should neither approve nor dismiss that mendicant's
statement.[2013](endnotes.xhtml_note-2013){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2013
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, you should question them:
'Reverend, these four kinds of expression have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. What four? One speaks of the seen as seen, the heard as
heard, the thought as thought, and the known as
known.[2014](endnotes.xhtml_note-2014){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2014
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} These are the four kinds of expression
rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. How does the venerable know and see
regarding these four kinds of expression so that your mind is freed from
defilements by not grasping?'

For a mendicant with defilements ended---who has completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is
rightly freed through enlightenment---it is in line with the teaching to
answer: 'Regarding what is seen, reverends, I live without going near or
going away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, my mind free of
limits.[2015](endnotes.xhtml_note-2015){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2015
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Regarding what is heard ... thought ... or
known, I live without going near or going away, independent, untied,
liberated, detached, my mind free of limits. That is how I know and see
regarding these four kinds of expression so that my mind is freed from
defilements by not grasping.'

Saying 'Good!' you should applaud and cheer that mendicant's statement,
then ask a further question:

'Reverend, these five grasping aggregates have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. What five? That is: the grasping aggregates of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These are the five
grasping aggregates that have been rightly explained by the Buddha. How
does the venerable know and see regarding these five grasping aggregates
so that your mind is freed from defilements by not grasping?'

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching
to answer: 'Reverends, knowing that form is powerless, faded, and
unreliable, I understand that my mind is freed through the ending,
fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of attraction,
grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency for
form.[2016](endnotes.xhtml_note-2016){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2016
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Knowing that feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness is powerless, faded, and unreliable, I
understand that my mind is freed through the ending, fading away,
cessation, giving away, and letting go of attraction, grasping, mental
fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency for consciousness. That is
how I know and see regarding these five grasping aggregates so that my
mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.'

Saying 'Good!' you should applaud and cheer that mendicant's statement,
then ask a further question:

'Reverend, these six elements have been rightly explained by the Buddha.
What six? The elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and
consciousness. These are the six elements that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. How does the venerable know and see regarding
these six elements so that your mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping?'

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching
to answer: 'Reverends, I've not taken the earth element as self, nor is
there a self based on the earth
element.[2017](endnotes.xhtml_note-2017){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2017
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And I understand that my mind is freed
through the ending, fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go
of attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying
tendency based on the earth element. I've not taken the water element
... fire element ... air element ... space element ... consciousness
element as self, nor is there a self based on the consciousness element.
And I understand that my mind is freed through the ending of attraction
based on the consciousness element. That is how I know and see regarding
these six elements so that my mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping.'

Saying 'Good!' you should applaud and cheer that mendicant's statement,
then ask a further question:

'Reverend, these six interior and exterior sense fields have been
rightly explained by the Buddha. What six? The eye and sights, the ear
and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and
touches, and the mind and ideas. These are the six interior and exterior
sense fields that have been rightly explained by the Buddha. How does
the venerable know and see regarding these six interior and exterior
sense fields so that your mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping?'

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching
to answer: 'I understand that my mind is freed through the ending,
fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of desire and greed
and relishing and craving; attraction, grasping, mental fixation,
insistence, and underlying tendency for the eye, sights, eye
consciousness, and things knowable by eye
consciousness.[2018](endnotes.xhtml_note-2018){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2018
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I understand that my mind is freed through
the ending of desire for the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind,
ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness.
That is how I know and see regarding these six interior and exterior
sense fields so that my mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.'

Saying 'Good!' you should applaud and cheer that mendicant's statement,
then ask a further question:

'Sir, how does the venerable know and see so that he has eradicated
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit for this
conscious body and all external stimuli?'

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching
to answer: 'Formerly, reverends, when I was still a layperson, I was
ignorant. Then the Realized One or one of his disciples taught me the
Dhamma. I gained faith in the Realized One, and reflected:

"Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open. It's
not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly
full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off my hair and
beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to
homelessness?"

After some time I gave up a large or small fortune, and a large or small
family circle. I shaved off hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and
went forth from the lay life to homelessness. Once I had gone forth, I
took up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. I gave up killing
living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I was scrupulous and
kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. I gave up stealing.
I took only what's given, and expected only what's given. I kept myself
clean by not thieving. I gave up unchastity. I became celibate, set
apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I gave up lying. I spoke the
truth and stuck to the truth. I was honest and trustworthy, not tricking
the world with my words. I gave up divisive speech. I didn't repeat in
one place what I heard in another so as to divide people against each
other. Instead, I reconciled those who are divided, supporting unity,
delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony. I gave up harsh speech. I spoke in a way that's mellow,
pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and
agreeable to the people. I gave up talking nonsense. My words were
timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. I
said things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct,
and beneficial.

I avoided injuring plants and seeds. I ate in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. I avoided
seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . I avoided beautifying and
adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I avoided high and
luxurious beds. I avoided receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw
meat, women and girls, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep,
chicken and pigs, elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and fields and
land. I avoided running errands and messages; buying and selling;
falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and
duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and
violence.

I became content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever I went, I set out taking only these things.
Like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. In the same
way, I became content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to
look after the belly. Wherever I went, I set out taking only these
things. When I had this entire spectrum of noble ethics, I experienced a
blameless happiness inside myself.

When I saw a sight with my eyes, I didn't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, I practiced restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When I heard a sound with
my ears ... When I smelled an odor with my nose ... When I tasted a
flavor with my tongue ... When I felt a touch with my body ... When I
knew an idea with my mind, I didn't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of the mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, I practiced restraint, protecting the
faculty of the mind, and achieving its restraint. When I had this noble
sense restraint, I experienced an unsullied bliss inside myself.

I acted with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When I had this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble contentment,
this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational
awareness, I frequented a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a
tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the
open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, I returned from almsround,
sat down cross-legged, set my body straight, and established mindfulness
in his presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, I meditated with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, I meditated with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, I meditated with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, I meditated
without restlessness, my mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of
restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, I meditated having gone
beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind
of doubt.

I gave up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements.[2019](endnotes.xhtml_note-2019){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2019
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I truly understood: "This is suffering" ...
"This is the origin of suffering" ... "This is the cessation of
suffering" ... "This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering". I truly understood: "These are defilements"... "This is the
origin of defilements" ... "This is the cessation of defilements" ...
"This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements".

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it was freed, I
knew it was freed. I understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual
journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is
nothing further for this place." That is how I know and see so that I
have eradicated I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli.'

Saying 'Good!' you should applaud and cheer that mendicant's statement,
and then say to them: 'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to
see a venerable such as yourself as one of our spiritual companions!'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha
said.[2020](endnotes.xhtml_note-2020){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2020
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn113">

### [MN 113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you the qualities of a true person and the
qualities of an untrue person. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is a quality of an untrue person? Take an untrue person who
has gone forth from an eminent family. They reflect: 'I have gone forth
from an eminent family, unlike these other mendicants.' And they glorify
themselves and put others down on account of that. This is a quality of
an untrue person. A true person reflects: 'It's not because of one's
eminent family that thoughts of greed, hate, or delusion come to an end.
Even if someone has not gone forth from an eminent family, if they
practice in line with the teaching, practice properly, and live in line
with the teaching, they are worthy of honor and praise for that.'
Keeping the practice to themselves, they don't glorify themselves and
put others down on account of their eminent
family.[2021](endnotes.xhtml_note-2021){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2021
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who has gone forth from a great
family ... from a wealthy family ... from an extremely wealthy family.
They reflect: 'I have gone forth from an extremely wealthy family,
unlike these other mendicants.' And they glorify themselves and put
others down on account of that. This too is a quality of an untrue
person. A true person reflects: 'It's not because of one's extremely
wealthy family that thoughts of greed, hate, or delusion come to an end.
Even if someone has not gone forth from an extremely wealthy family, if
they practice in line with the teaching, practice properly, and live in
line with the teaching, they are worthy of honor and praise for that.'
Keeping the practice to themselves, they don't glorify themselves and
put others down on account of their extremely wealthy family. This too
is a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who is well-known and famous. They
reflect: 'I'm well-known and famous. These other mendicants are obscure
and insignificant.' And they glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that. This too is a quality of an untrue person. A true
person reflects: 'It's not because of one's fame that thoughts of greed,
hate, or delusion come to an end. Even if someone is not well-known and
famous, if they practice in line with the teaching, practice properly,
and live in line with the teaching, they are worthy of honor and praise
for that.' Keeping the practice to themselves, they don't glorify
themselves and put others down on account of their fame. This too is a
quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who receives robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. They reflect: 'I
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick, unlike these other mendicants.' And they glorify themselves and
put others down on account of that. This too is a quality of an untrue
person. A true person reflects: 'It's not because of one's material
things that thoughts of greed, hate, or delusion come to an end. Even if
someone doesn't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick, if they practice in line with the teaching,
practice properly, and live in line with the teaching, they are worthy
of honor and praise for that.' Keeping the practice to themselves, they
don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of their
material things. This too is a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who is very learned ... who is an
expert in the monastic law ... who is a Dhamma teacher ... who dwells in
the wilderness ... who is a rag robe wearer ... who eats only almsfood
... who stays at the root of a tree ... who stays in a charnel ground
... who stays in the open air ... who never lies down ... who sleeps
wherever they lay their mat ... who eats in one sitting per day. They
reflect: 'I eat in one sitting per day, unlike these other mendicants.'
And they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This
too is a quality of an untrue person. A true person reflects: 'It's not
because of eating in one sitting per day that thoughts of greed, hate,
or delusion come to an end. Even if someone eats in more than one
sitting per day, if they practice in line with the teaching, practice
properly, and live in line with the teaching, they are worthy of honor
and praise for that.' Keeping the practice to themselves, they don't
glorify themselves and put others down on account of their eating in one
sitting per day. This too is a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. They reflect: 'I have
attained the first absorption, unlike these other mendicants.' And they
glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too is a
quality of an untrue person. A true person reflects: 'The Buddha has
spoken of not being determined even by the attainment of the first
absorption.[2022](endnotes.xhtml_note-2022){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2022
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For whatever they imagine it is, it turns
out to be something
else.'[2023](endnotes.xhtml_note-2023){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2023
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Keeping to themselves the fact that they
are not determined by that, they don't glorify themselves and put others
down on account of their attainment of the first absorption. This too is
a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. They reflect: 'I
have attained the fourth absorption, unlike these other mendicants.' And
they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too
is a quality of an untrue person. A true person reflects: 'The Buddha
has spoken of not being determined even by the attainment of the fourth
absorption. For whatever they imagine it is, it turns out to be
something else.' Keeping to themselves the fact that they are not
determined by that, they don't glorify themselves and put others down on
account of their attainment of the fourth absorption. This too is a
quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take an untrue person who, going totally beyond perceptions
of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space ... the dimension of infinite
consciousness ... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They reflect: 'I have attained
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, unlike these
other mendicants.' And they glorify themselves and put others down on
account of that. This too is a quality of an untrue person. A true
person reflects: 'The Buddha has spoken of not being determined even by
the attainment of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. For whatever they imagine it is, it turns out to be
something else.' Keeping to themselves the fact that they are not
determined by that, they don't glorify themselves and put others down on
account of their attainment of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. This too is a quality of a true person.

Furthermore, take a true person who, going totally beyond the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. This is a mendicant who does not conceive
with anything, does not conceive regarding anything, does not conceive
through anything."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn114">

### [MN 114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [What Should and Should Not Be Cultivated ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sevitabbāsevitabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2024](endnotes.xhtml_note-2024){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2024
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on what
should and should not be
cultivated.[2025](endnotes.xhtml_note-2025){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2025
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"I say that there are two kinds of bodily
behavior:[2026](endnotes.xhtml_note-2026){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2026
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. And each of these is a kind of bodily
behavior.

I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
a kind of verbal behavior.

I say that there are two kinds of mental behavior: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
a kind of mental behavior.

I say that there are two arisings of thought: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
an arising of thought.

I say that there are two acquisitions of perception: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of
these is an acquisition of perception.

I say that there are two acquisitions of views: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
an acquisition of views.

I say that there are two kinds of reincarnation in a
life-form:[2027](endnotes.xhtml_note-2027){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2027
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. And these are equally reincarnation in a
life-form."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the
Buddha,[2028](endnotes.xhtml_note-2028){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2028
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, this is how I understand the detailed
meaning of the Buddha's brief statement.

'I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of
these is a kind of bodily behavior.' That's what the Buddha said, but
why did he say it? You should not cultivate the kind of bodily behavior
which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities
decline. And you should cultivate the kind of bodily behavior which
causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

And what kind of bodily behavior causes unskillful qualities to grow
while skillful qualities
decline?[2029](endnotes.xhtml_note-2029){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2029
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone kills living creatures.
They're violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living
beings. They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the
wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. They commit
sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who have their
mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or
clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman who is
protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is
punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal. That kind of bodily behavior causes unskillful qualities to
grow while skillful qualities decline.

And what kind of bodily behavior causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow? It's when someone gives up killing living
creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword. They're scrupulous and
kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. They give up
stealing. They don't, with the intention to commit theft, take the
wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. They give up
sexual misconduct. They don't have sexual relations with women who have
their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sexual relations with a
woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose
violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a
token of betrothal. That kind of bodily behavior causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there
are two kinds of bodily behavior: that which you should cultivate, and
that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is a kind of
bodily behavior.' That's what the Buddha said, and this is why he said
it.

'I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of
these is a kind of verbal behavior.' That's what the Buddha said, but
why did he say it? You should not cultivate the kind of verbal behavior
which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities
decline. And you should cultivate the kind of verbal behavior which
causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

And what kind of verbal behavior causes unskillful qualities to grow
while skillful qualities
decline?[2030](endnotes.xhtml_note-2030){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2030
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone lies. They're summoned to
a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal
court, and asked to bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.'
Not knowing, they say 'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not
seeing, they say 'I see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they
deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some
trivial worldly reason. They speak divisively. They repeat in one place
what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other.
And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division,
delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote
division. They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are
cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to
immersion. They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither
factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the
training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable,
rambling, and pointless. That kind of verbal behavior causes unskillful
qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline.

And what kind of verbal behavior causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow? It's when a certain person gives up
lying. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a
guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: 'Please,
mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I don't know.'
Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I don't see.' And
seeing, they say 'I see.' So they don't deliberately lie for the sake of
themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. They give up
divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they
reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. They give
up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing to the ear,
lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people.
They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
That kind of verbal behavior causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there are two kinds of verbal
behavior: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. And each of these is a kind of verbal behavior.' That's what
the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of mental behavior: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of
these is a kind of mental behavior.' That's what the Buddha said, but
why did he say it? You should not cultivate the kind of mental behavior
which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities
decline. And you should cultivate the kind of mental behavior which
causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

And what kind of mental behavior causes unskillful qualities to grow
while skillful qualities
decline?[2031](endnotes.xhtml_note-2031){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2031
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone is covetous. They covet
the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were
mine!' They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient
beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!' That
kind of mental behavior causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities decline.

And what kind of mental behavior causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow? It's when someone is content. They don't
covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh, if only their belongings
were mine!' They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these
sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'
That kind of mental behavior causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there are two kinds of mental
behavior: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. And each of these is a kind of mental behavior.' That's what
the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

'I say that there are two arisings of thought: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
an arising of thought.' That's what the Buddha said, but why did he say
it? You should not cultivate the arising of thought which causes
unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you
should cultivate the arising of thought which causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

And what arising of thought causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities
decline?[2032](endnotes.xhtml_note-2032){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2032
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone is covetous, and lives
with their heart full of covetousness. They are malicious, and live with
their heart full of ill will. They're hurtful, and live with their heart
intent on harm. That arising of thought causes unskillful qualities to
grow while skillful qualities decline.

And what arising of thought causes unskillful qualities to decline while
skillful qualities grow? It's when someone is content, and lives with
their heart full of contentment. They have good will, and live with
their heart full of good will. They're kind, and live with their heart
full of kindness. That arising of thought causes unskillful qualities to
decline while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there are two
arisings of thought: that which you should cultivate, and that which you
should not cultivate. And each of these is an arising of thought.'
That's what the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

'I say that there are two acquisitions of perception: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of
these is an acquisition of perception.' That's what the Buddha said, but
why did he say it? You should not cultivate the acquisition of
perception which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful
qualities decline. And you should cultivate the acquisition of
perception which causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful
qualities grow.

And what acquisition of perception causes unskillful qualities to grow
while skillful qualities
decline?[2033](endnotes.xhtml_note-2033){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2033
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone is covetous, and lives
with their perception full of covetousness. They are malicious, and live
with their perception full of ill will. They're hurtful, and live with
their perception intent on harm. That acquisition of perception causes
unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline.

And what acquisition of perception causes unskillful qualities to
decline while skillful qualities grow? It's when someone is content, and
lives with their perception full of contentment. They have good will,
and live with their perception full of good will. They're kind, and live
with their perception full of kindness. That acquisition of perception
causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow. 'I
say that there are two acquisitions of perception: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
an acquisition of perception.' That's what the Buddha said, and this is
why he said it.

'I say that there are two acquisitions of views: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And each of these is
an acquisition of views.' That's what the Buddha said, but why did he
say it? You should not cultivate the acquisition of views which causes
unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you
should cultivate the acquisition of views which causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

And what acquisition of views causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities
decline?[2034](endnotes.xhtml_note-2034){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2034
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when someone has such a view: 'There's
no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or
result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such
thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And
there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly
practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their
own insight.' That acquisition of views causes unskillful qualities to
grow while skillful qualities decline.

And what acquisition of views causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow? It's when someone has such a view: 'There
is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and
results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such
things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously.
And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and
rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it
with their own insight.' That acquisition of views causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there
are two acquisitions of views: that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. And each of these is an acquisition of
views.' That's what the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of reincarnation in a life-form: that
which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. And
these are equally reincarnation in a life-form.' That's what the Buddha
said, but why did he say it? Reincarnation in a life-form that causes
unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline: you
should not cultivate reincarnation in such a life-form. Reincarnation in
a life-form that causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful
qualities grow: you should cultivate reincarnation such in a life-form.

And reincarnation in what kind of life-form causes unskillful qualities
to grow while skillful qualities
decline?[2035](endnotes.xhtml_note-2035){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2035
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For one who generates reincarnation in a
hurtful life-form not for the sake of the state of perfection,
unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities
decline.[2036](endnotes.xhtml_note-2036){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2036
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And reincarnation in what kind of life-form
causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow?
For one who generates rebirth in a pleasing life-form for the sake of
the state of perfection, unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities
grow.[2037](endnotes.xhtml_note-2037){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2037
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I say that there are two kinds of
reincarnation in a life-form: that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. And these are equally reincarnation in a
life-form.' That's what the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

Sir, that's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."[2038](endnotes.xhtml_note-2038){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2038
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of my brief statement in this way."

And the Buddha went on to repeat and endorse Venerable Sāriputta's
explanation in full. Then he went on to explain further:

"I say that there are two kinds of sight known by the
eye:[2039](endnotes.xhtml_note-2039){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2039
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. I say that there are two kinds of sound
known by the ear ... two kinds of smell known by the nose ... two kinds
of taste known by the tongue ... two kinds of touch known by the body
... two kinds of idea known by the mind: that which you should
cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief
statement.[2040](endnotes.xhtml_note-2040){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2040
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'I say that there are two kinds of sight known by the eye: that which
you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.' That's
what the Buddha said, but why did he say it? You should not cultivate
the kind of sight known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to
grow while skillful qualities decline. And you should cultivate the kind
of sight known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to decline
while skillful qualities grow. 'I say that there are two kinds of sight
known by the eye: that which you should cultivate, and that which you
should not cultivate.' That's what the Buddha said, and this is why he
said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of sound known by the ear ... two kinds
of smell known by the nose ... two kinds of taste known by the tongue
... two kinds of touch known by the body ... two kinds of idea known by
the mind: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate.' That's what the Buddha said, but why did he say it?

You should not cultivate the kind of idea known by the mind which causes
unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you
should cultivate the kind of idea known by the mind which causes
unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow. 'I say
that there are two kinds of idea known by the mind: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.' That's what
the Buddha said, and this is why he said it. Sir, that's how I
understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of my brief statement in this way."

And the Buddha went on to repeat and endorse Venerable Sāriputta's
explanation in full. Then he went on to explain further:

"I say that there are two kinds of
robes:[2041](endnotes.xhtml_note-2041){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2041
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate. I say that there are two kinds of
almsfood ... lodging ... village ... town ... city ... country ...
person: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief
statement.[2042](endnotes.xhtml_note-2042){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2042
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'I say that there are two kinds of robes
... almsfood ... lodging ... village ... town ... city ... country ...
person: that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate.' That's what the Buddha said, but why did he say it? You
should not cultivate the kind of person who causes unskillful qualities
to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you should cultivate the
kind of person who causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful
qualities grow. 'I say that there are two kinds of person: those who you
should cultivate, and those who you should not cultivate.' That's what
the Buddha said, and this is why he said it.

Sir, that's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of my brief statement in this way."

And the Buddha went on to repeat and endorse Venerable Sāriputta's
explanation in full. Then he added:

"If all the aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to
understand the detailed meaning of my brief statement in this way, it
would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If the whole
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---was to understand the detailed
meaning of my brief statement in this way, it would be for the whole
world's lasting welfare and happiness."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Sāriputta approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn115">

### [MN 115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Many Elements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahudhātukasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute.[2043](endnotes.xhtml_note-2043){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2043
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Whatever perils there are, all come from
the foolish, not from the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come
from the foolish, not from the astute. It's like a fire that spreads
from a hut made of reeds or grass, and burns down even a bungalow,
plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows
shuttered. In the same way, whatever dangers there are, all come from
the foolish, not from the astute. Whatever perils there are, all come
from the foolish, not from the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all
come from the foolish, not from the astute. So, the fool is dangerous,
but the astute person is safe. The fool is perilous, but the astute
person is not. The fool is hazardous, but the astute person is not.
There's no danger, peril, or hazard that comes from the astute. So you
should train like this: 'We shall be astute, we shall be inquirers.'"

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, how is a
mendicant qualified to be called 'astute, an
inquirer'?"[2044](endnotes.xhtml_note-2044){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2044
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant is skilled in the elements, in the sense
fields, in dependent origination, and in the possible and the
impossible. That's how a mendicant is qualified to be called 'astute, an
inquirer'."

"But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called 'skilled in the
elements'?"[2045](endnotes.xhtml_note-2045){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2045
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are, Ānanda, these eighteen elements: the elements of the eye,
sights, and eye consciousness; the ear, sounds, and ear consciousness;
the nose, smells, and nose consciousness; the tongue, tastes, and tongue
consciousness; the body, touches, and body consciousness; the mind,
ideas, and mind
consciousness.[2046](endnotes.xhtml_note-2046){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2046
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant knows and sees these
eighteen elements, they're qualified to be called 'skilled in the
elements'."

"But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified
to be called 'skilled in the
elements'?"[2047](endnotes.xhtml_note-2047){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2047
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There could, Ānanda. There are these six elements: the elements of
earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. When a mendicant
knows and sees these six elements, they're qualified to be called
'skilled in the elements'."

"But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified
to be called 'skilled in the elements'?"

"There could, Ānanda. There are these six elements: the elements of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, equanimity, and ignorance. When a
mendicant knows and sees these six elements, they're qualified to be
called 'skilled in the elements'."

"But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified
to be called 'skilled in the elements'?"

"There could, Ānanda. There are these six elements: the elements of
sensuality and renunciation, malice and good will, and cruelty and
harmlessness. When a mendicant knows and sees these six elements,
they're qualified to be called 'skilled in the elements'."

"But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified
to be called 'skilled in the elements'?"

"There could, Ānanda. There are these three elements: the elements of
the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm.
When a mendicant knows and sees these three elements, they're qualified
to be called 'skilled in the elements'."

"But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified
to be called 'skilled in the elements'?"

"There could, Ānanda. There are these two elements: the conditioned
element and the unconditioned element. When a mendicant knows and sees
these two elements, they're qualified to be called 'skilled in the
elements'."

"But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called 'skilled in the
sense
fields'?"[2048](endnotes.xhtml_note-2048){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2048
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"There are these six interior and exterior sense fields: the eye and
sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes,
the body and touches, and the mind and ideas. When a mendicant knows and
sees these six interior and exterior sense fields, they're qualified to
be called 'skilled in the sense fields'."

"But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called 'skilled in
dependent origination'?"

"It's when a mendicant understands: 'When this exists, that is; due to
the arising of this, that arises. When this doesn't exist, that is not;
due to the cessation of this, that ceases. That is: ignorance is a
condition for choices. Choices are conditions for consciousness.
Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are
conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions
for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition
for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this
entire mass of suffering originates. When ignorance fades away and
ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease,
consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense
fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When
feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases.' That's how a mendicant is
qualified to be called 'skilled in dependent origination'."

"But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called 'skilled in the
possible and
impossible'?"[2049](endnotes.xhtml_note-2049){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2049
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"It's when a mendicant understands: 'It's impossible for a person
accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not
possible.[2050](endnotes.xhtml_note-2050){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2050
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible for an ordinary person to
take some condition as permanent. That is possible.' They understand:
'It's impossible for a person accomplished in view to take any condition
as pleasant. But it's possible for an ordinary person to take some
condition as pleasant.' They understand: 'It's impossible for a person
accomplished in view to take anything as self. But it's possible for an
ordinary person to take something as self.'

They understand: 'It's impossible for a person accomplished in view to
murder their
mother.[2051](endnotes.xhtml_note-2051){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2051
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible for an ordinary person to
murder their mother.' They understand: 'It's impossible for a person
accomplished in view to murder their father ... or murder a perfected
one. But it's possible for an ordinary person to murder their father ...
or a perfected one.' They understand: 'It's impossible for a person
accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent. But
it's possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with
malicious intent.' They understand: 'It's impossible for a person
accomplished in view to cause a schism in the Saṅgha. But it's possible
for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the Saṅgha.' They
understand: 'It's impossible for a person accomplished in view to
dedicate themselves to another
teacher.[2052](endnotes.xhtml_note-2052){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2052
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible for an ordinary person to
dedicate themselves to another teacher.'

They understand: 'It's impossible for two perfected ones, fully awakened
Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same
time.[2053](endnotes.xhtml_note-2053){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2053
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible for just one perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha, to arise in one solar system.' They
understand: 'It's impossible for two wheel-turning monarchs to arise in
the same solar system at the same
time.[2054](endnotes.xhtml_note-2054){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2054
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible for just one
wheel-turning monarch to arise in one solar system.'

They understand: 'It's impossible for a woman to be a perfected one, a
fully awakened
Buddha.[2055](endnotes.xhtml_note-2055){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2055
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible for a man to be a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha.' They understand: 'It's
impossible for a woman to be a wheel-turning monarch. But it is possible
for a man to be a wheel-turning monarch.' They understand: 'It's
impossible for a woman to perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or
Brahmā.[2056](endnotes.xhtml_note-2056){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2056
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible for a man to perform the
role of Sakka, Māra, or Brahmā.'

They understand: 'It's impossible for a likable, desirable, agreeable
result to come from bad conduct of body, speech, and mind. But it is
possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from
bad conduct of body, speech, and mind.'

They understand: 'It's impossible for an unlikable, undesirable,
disagreeable result to come from good conduct of body, speech, and mind.
But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come
from good conduct of body, speech, and mind.'

They understand: 'It's impossible that someone who has engaged in bad
conduct of body, speech, and mind, could for that reason alone, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.[2057](endnotes.xhtml_note-2057){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2057
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible that someone who has
engaged in bad conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.'

They understand: 'It's impossible that someone who has engaged in good
conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason alone, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. But it is possible that someone who has
engaged in good conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm.' That's how a mendicant is qualified to be
called 'skilled in the possible and impossible'."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "It's
incredible, sir, it's amazing! What is the name of this exposition of
the teaching?"

"Well then, Ānanda, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as
'The Many Elements', or else 'The Four Rounds', or else 'The Mirror of
the Teaching', or else 'The Drum of Freedom From Death', or else 'The
Supreme Victory in
Battle'."[2058](endnotes.xhtml_note-2058){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2058
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn116">

### [MN 116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Isigili ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Isigilisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2059](endnotes.xhtml_note-2059){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2059
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, on the Isigili
Mountain.[2060](endnotes.xhtml_note-2060){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2060
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, do you see that Mount Vebhāra?"

"Yes, sir."

"It used to have a different label and description. Do you see that
Mount Paṇḍava?"

"Yes, sir."

"It too used to have a different label and description. Do you see that
Mount Vepulla?"

"Yes, sir."

"It too used to have a different label and description. Do you see that
Mount Vulture's Peak?"

"Yes, sir."

"It too used to have a different label and description. Do you see that
Mount Isigili?"

"Yes, sir."

"It used to have exactly the same label and description.

Once upon a time, five hundred Independent Buddhas dwelt for a long time
on this
Isigili.[2061](endnotes.xhtml_note-2061){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2061
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They were seen entering the mountain, but
after entering were seen no more. When people noticed this they said:
'That mountain swallows these seers!' That's how it came to be known as
Isigili, the
"seer-swallower".[2062](endnotes.xhtml_note-2062){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2062
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

I shall declare the names of the Independent
Buddhas;[2063](endnotes.xhtml_note-2063){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2063
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall extol the names of the Independent
Buddhas; I shall teach the names of the Independent Buddhas. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will
speak."[2064](endnotes.xhtml_note-2064){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2064
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"The independent Buddhas who dwelt for a long time on this Isigili were
named
Ariṭṭha,[2065](endnotes.xhtml_note-2065){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2065
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Upariṭṭha,[2066](endnotes.xhtml_note-2066){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2066
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Tagarasikhī,[2067](endnotes.xhtml_note-2067){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2067
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Yasassin,[2068](endnotes.xhtml_note-2068){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2068
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Sudassana,[2069](endnotes.xhtml_note-2069){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2069
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Piyadassin,[2070](endnotes.xhtml_note-2070){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2070
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Gandhāra,[2071](endnotes.xhtml_note-2071){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2071
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Piṇḍola,[2072](endnotes.xhtml_note-2072){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2072
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}
Upāsabha,[2073](endnotes.xhtml_note-2073){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2073
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nīta, Tatha, Sutavā, and Bhāvitatta.

> Those saintly beings, untroubled, `<j>`{=html}with no need for
> hope,[2074](endnotes.xhtml_note-2074){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2074
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> who each achieved awakening independently;\
> hear me extol their names,\
> the supreme persons, free of thorns.
>
> Ariṭṭha, Upariṭṭha, Tagarasikhī, Yasassin,\
> Sudassana, and Piyadassin the awakened;\
> Gandhāra, Piṇḍola, and Upāsabha,\
> Nīta, Tatha, Sutavā, and
> Bhāvitatta.[2075](endnotes.xhtml_note-2075){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2075
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Sumbha, Subha, Methula, and
> Aṭṭhama,[2076](endnotes.xhtml_note-2076){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2076
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> then Assumegha, Anīgha, and
> Sudāṭha,[2077](endnotes.xhtml_note-2077){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2077
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Independent Buddhas, enders of the conduit to rebirth;\
> and Hiṅgū and Hiṅga the
> mighty.[2078](endnotes.xhtml_note-2078){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2078
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Two sages named Jāli, and
> Aṭṭhaka;[2079](endnotes.xhtml_note-2079){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2079
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> then the awakened one Kosala, then
> Subāhu;[2080](endnotes.xhtml_note-2080){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2080
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Upanemi, Nemi, and
> Santacitta,[2081](endnotes.xhtml_note-2081){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2081
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> right and true, stainless and
> astute.[2082](endnotes.xhtml_note-2082){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2082
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Kāḷa and Upakāḷa, Vijita and
> Jita,[2083](endnotes.xhtml_note-2083){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2083
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Aṅga and Paṅga, and Guttijita
> too;[2084](endnotes.xhtml_note-2084){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2084
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Passin gave up attachment, suffering's
> root,[2085](endnotes.xhtml_note-2085){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2085
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> while Aparājita defeated Māra's
> power.[2086](endnotes.xhtml_note-2086){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2086
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Satthar, Pavattar, Sarabhaṅga,
> Lomahaṁsa,[2087](endnotes.xhtml_note-2087){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2087
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Uccaṅgamāya, Asita,
> Anāsava,[2088](endnotes.xhtml_note-2088){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2088
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Manomaya, and Bandhumā the cutter of conceit,\
> then Adhimutta, and Ketumā the
> immaculate.[2089](endnotes.xhtml_note-2089){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2089
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Ketumbharāga, Mātaṅga, and
> Ariya,[2090](endnotes.xhtml_note-2090){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2090
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> then Accuta, Accutagāma, and
> Byāmaka,[2091](endnotes.xhtml_note-2091){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2091
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Sumaṅgala, Dabbila,
> Supatiṭṭhita,[2092](endnotes.xhtml_note-2092){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2092
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Asayha, Khemābhirata, and
> Sorata.[2093](endnotes.xhtml_note-2093){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2093
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Durannaya, Saṅgha, and also
> Ujjaya,[2094](endnotes.xhtml_note-2094){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2094
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> another sage, Sayha of peerless
> effort.[2095](endnotes.xhtml_note-2095){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2095
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> There are twelve Ānandas, Nandas, and
> Upanandas,[2096](endnotes.xhtml_note-2096){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2096
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and Bhāradvāja, bearing his final
> body.[2097](endnotes.xhtml_note-2097){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2097
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Bodhi, Mahānāma, and also
> Uttara,[2098](endnotes.xhtml_note-2098){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2098
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Kesī, Sikhī, Sundara, and
> Bhāradvāja,[2099](endnotes.xhtml_note-2099){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2099
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Tissa and Upatissa, `<j>`{=html}who've both cut the bonds to
> rebirth,[2100](endnotes.xhtml_note-2100){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2100
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> Upasīdarī and Sīdarī, who've both cut off
> craving.[2101](endnotes.xhtml_note-2101){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2101
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Maṅgala was awakened, free of
> greed,[2102](endnotes.xhtml_note-2102){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2102
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Usabha cut the net, the root of
> suffering,[2103](endnotes.xhtml_note-2103){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2103
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Upanīta who attained the state of
> peace,[2104](endnotes.xhtml_note-2104){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2104
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Uposatha, Sundara, and
> Saccanāma.[2105](endnotes.xhtml_note-2105){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2105
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Jeta, Jayanta, Paduma, and
> Uppala;[2106](endnotes.xhtml_note-2106){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2106
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Padumuttara, Rakkhita, and
> Pabbata,[2107](endnotes.xhtml_note-2107){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2107
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> Mānatthaddha, beautiful and free of
> greed,[2108](endnotes.xhtml_note-2108){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2108
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and the Buddha Kaṇha, his mind well
> freed.[2109](endnotes.xhtml_note-2109){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2109
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> These and other mighty ones `<j>`{=html}awakened
> independently,[2110](endnotes.xhtml_note-2110){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2110
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"} `</j>`{=html}\
> enders of the conduit to rebirth---\
> honor these great seers `<j>`{=html}who have slipped all chains,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> fully quenched, limitless."

</article>
<article id="mn117">

### [MN 117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Forty ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahācattārīsakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2111](endnotes.xhtml_note-2111){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2111
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital
conditions and its
prerequisites.[2112](endnotes.xhtml_note-2112){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2112
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its
prerequisites? They are: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites is what is
called noble right immersion 'with its vital conditions' and also 'with
its
prerequisites'.[2113](endnotes.xhtml_note-2113){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2113
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this context, right view comes
first.[2114](endnotes.xhtml_note-2114){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2114
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does right view come first? When
you understand wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view,
that's your right
view.[2115](endnotes.xhtml_note-2115){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2115
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is wrong view? 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or
offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no
afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that
are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is
rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife
after realizing it with their own insight.' This is wrong view.

And what is right view? Right view is twofold, I say. There is right
view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and
ripens in
attachments.[2116](endnotes.xhtml_note-2116){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2116
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there is right view that is noble,
undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the
path.[2117](endnotes.xhtml_note-2117){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2117
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is right view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of
good deeds, and ripens in attachments? 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is right view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good
deeds, and ripens in attachments.

And what is right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor
of the path? It's the wisdom---the faculty of wisdom, the power of
wisdom, the awakening factor of investigation of principles, and right
view as a factor of the path---in one intent on the noble, intent on the
undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble
path.[2118](endnotes.xhtml_note-2118){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2118
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right view that is noble,
undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path.

They make an effort to give up wrong view and embrace right view: that's
their right effort. Mindfully they give up wrong view and take up right
view: that's their right mindfulness. So these three things keep running
and circling around right view, namely: right view, right effort, and
right
mindfulness.[2119](endnotes.xhtml_note-2119){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2119
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this context, right view comes
first.[2120](endnotes.xhtml_note-2120){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2120
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And how does right view come first? When
you understand wrong thought as wrong thought and right thought as right
thought, that's your right
view.[2121](endnotes.xhtml_note-2121){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2121
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And what is wrong thought? Thoughts of sensuality, of malice, and of
cruelty. This is wrong thought.

And what is right thought? Right thought is twofold, I say. There is
right thought that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good
deeds, and ripens in attachments. And there is right thought that is
noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path.

And what is right thought that is accompanied by defilements, partakes
of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? Thoughts of renunciation, good
will, and harmlessness. This is right thought that is accompanied by
defilements.

And what is right thought that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a
factor of the path? It's the thinking---the placing of the mind,
thought, planting, implanting, embedding of the mind, verbal
process---in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who
possesses the noble path and develops the noble
path.[2122](endnotes.xhtml_note-2122){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2122
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is right thought that is noble.

They make an effort to give up wrong thought and embrace right thought:
that's their right effort. Mindfully they give up wrong thought and take
up right thought: that's their right mindfulness. So these three things
keep running and circling around right thought, namely: right view,
right effort, and right mindfulness.

In this context, right view comes first. And how does right view come
first? When you understand wrong speech as wrong speech and right speech
as right speech, that's your right view.

And what is wrong speech? Speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. This is wrong speech.

And what is right speech? Right speech is twofold, I say. There is right
speech that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and
ripens in attachments. And there is right speech that is noble,
undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path.

And what is right speech that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of
good deeds, and ripens in attachments? The refraining from lying,
divisive speech, harsh speech, and talking
nonsense.[2123](endnotes.xhtml_note-2123){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2123
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is right speech that is accompanied by
defilements.

And what is right speech that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a
factor of the path? It's the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and
refraining from the four kinds of bad verbal conduct in one intent on
the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and
develops the noble
path.[2124](endnotes.xhtml_note-2124){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2124
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is right speech that is noble.

They make an effort to give up wrong speech and embrace right speech:
that's their right effort. Mindfully they give up wrong speech and take
up right speech: that's their right mindfulness. So these three things
keep running and circling around right speech, namely: right view, right
effort, and right mindfulness.

In this context, right view comes first. And how does right view come
first? When you understand wrong action as wrong action and right action
as right action, that's your right view.

And what is wrong action? Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual
misconduct. This is wrong action.

And what is right action? Right action is twofold, I say. There is right
action that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and
ripens in attachments. And there is right action that is noble,
undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path.

And what is right action that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of
good deeds, and ripens in attachments? Refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. This is right action that is
accompanied by defilements.

And what is right action that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a
factor of the path? It's the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and
refraining from the three kinds of bad bodily conduct in one intent on
the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and
develops the noble path. This is right action that is noble.

They make an effort to give up wrong action and embrace right action:
that's their right effort. Mindfully they give up wrong action and take
up right action: that's their right mindfulness. So these three things
keep running and circling around right action, namely: right view, right
effort, and right mindfulness.

In this context, right view comes first. And how does right view come
first? When you understand wrong livelihood as wrong livelihood and
right livelihood as right livelihood, that's your right view.

And what is wrong livelihood? Deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling,
and using material things to chase after other material
things.[2125](endnotes.xhtml_note-2125){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2125
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is wrong livelihood.

And what is right livelihood? Right livelihood is twofold, I say. There
is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good
deeds, and ripens in attachments. And there is right livelihood that is
noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path.

And what is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements,
partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? It's when a noble
disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right
livelihood.[2126](endnotes.xhtml_note-2126){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2126
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is right livelihood that is
accompanied by defilements.

And what is right livelihood that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a
factor of the path? It's the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and
refraining from wrong livelihood in one intent on the noble, intent on
the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path.
This is right livelihood that is noble.

They make an effort to give up wrong livelihood and embrace right
livelihood: that's their right effort. Mindfully they give up wrong
livelihood and take up right livelihood: that's their right mindfulness.
So these three things keep running and circling around right livelihood,
namely: right view, right effort, and right
mindfulness.[2127](endnotes.xhtml_note-2127){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2127
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

In this context, right view comes first. And how does right view come
first? Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise
to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action
gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right
effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness
gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right
knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right
freedom.[2128](endnotes.xhtml_note-2128){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2128
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So the trainee has eight factors, while the
perfected one has ten
factors.[2129](endnotes.xhtml_note-2129){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2129
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And here too, the eradication of many bad,
unskillful qualities is fully developed due to right knowledge.

In this context, right view comes first. And how does right view come
first? For one of right view, wrong view is worn
away.[2130](endnotes.xhtml_note-2130){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2130
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And the many bad, unskillful qualities that
arise because of wrong view are worn away. And because of right view,
many skillful qualities are fully developed. For one of right thought,
wrong thought is worn away. ... For one of right speech, wrong speech is
worn away. ... For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. ...
For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. ... For one
of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. ... For one of right
mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. ... For one of right
immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. ... For one of right knowledge,
wrong knowledge is worn away. ... For one of right freedom, wrong
freedom is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise
because of wrong freedom are worn away. And because of right freedom,
many skillful qualities are fully developed.

So there are twenty on the side of the skillful, and twenty on the side
of the
unskillful.[2131](endnotes.xhtml_note-2131){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2131
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This exposition of the teaching on the
Great Forty has been rolled forth. And it cannot be rolled back by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.

If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the
exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuttal and
criticism on ten legitimate grounds in the present life. If such a
gentleman criticizes right view, they praise and honor the ascetics and
brahmins who have wrong view. If they criticize right thought ... right
speech ... right action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right
mindfulness ... right immersion ... right knowledge ... right freedom,
they praise and honor the ascetics and brahmins who have wrong freedom.
If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the
exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuttal and
criticism on these ten legitimate grounds in the present life.

Even those wanderers of the past, Vassa and Bhañña of Ukkalā, who
adhered to the doctrines of no-cause, inaction, and nihilism, didn't
imagine that the Great Forty should be criticized or
rejected.[2132](endnotes.xhtml_note-2132){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2132
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? For fear of blame, attack, and
condemnation."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn118">

### [MN 118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of Breathing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānāpānassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2133](endnotes.xhtml_note-2133){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2133
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery, together with several well-known senior disciples, such as
the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa, Mahākaccāna,
Mahākoṭṭhita, Mahākappina, Mahācunda, Anuruddha, Revata, Ānanda, and
others.[2134](endnotes.xhtml_note-2134){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2134
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time the senior mendicants were advising and instructing the
junior
mendicants.[2135](endnotes.xhtml_note-2135){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2135
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Some senior mendicants instructed ten
mendicants, while some instructed twenty, thirty, or forty. Being
instructed by the senior mendicants, the junior mendicants realized a
higher distinction than they had before.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath---the full moon on the fifteenth
day---and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by a Saṅgha of monks for the
invitation to
admonish.[2136](endnotes.xhtml_note-2136){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2136
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of
mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed them:

"I am satisfied, mendicants, with this practice. My heart is satisfied
with this practice. So you should rouse up even more energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. I will wait here in Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the
fourth
month."[2137](endnotes.xhtml_note-2137){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2137
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mendicants from around the country heard about this, and came down to
Sāvatthī to see the Buddha.

And those senior mendicants instructed the junior mendicants even more.
Some senior mendicants instructed ten mendicants, while some instructed
twenty, thirty, or forty. Being instructed by the senior mendicants, the
junior mendicants realized a higher distinction than they had before.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath---the Komudī full moon on the
fifteenth day of the fourth month---and the Buddha was sitting in the
open surrounded by a Saṅgha of monks. Then the Buddha looked around the
Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed
them:[2138](endnotes.xhtml_note-2138){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2138
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"This assembly has no chaff, mendicants, it is free of chaff, pure, and
consolidated in the core. Such is this Saṅgha of mendicants, such is
this assembly! An assembly such as this is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit
for the world. Such is this Saṅgha of mendicants, such is this assembly!
For an assembly such as this, giving little becomes much, while giving
much becomes even more. Such is this Saṅgha of mendicants, such is this
assembly! An assembly such as this is rarely seen in the world. Such is
this Saṅgha of mendicants, such is this assembly! An assembly such as
this is worth traveling many leagues to see, even if you have to carry
your own provisions in a
knapsack.[2139](endnotes.xhtml_note-2139){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2139
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For in this Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants, who have ended the
defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done,
laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter
of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment.
There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha.

In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of the five
lower fetters are reborn spontaneously. They are extinguished there, and
are not liable to return from that world. There are such mendicants in
this Saṅgha.

In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three
fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are
once-returners. They come back to this world once only, then make an end
of suffering. There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha.

In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three
fetters are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld,
bound for awakening. There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha.

In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation ... the four right efforts ... the
four bases of psychic power ... the five faculties ... the five powers
... the seven awakening factors ... the noble eightfold path. There are
such mendicants in this Saṅgha. In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who
are committed to developing the meditation on love ... compassion ...
rejoicing ... equanimity ... ugliness ... impermanence. There are such
mendicants in this Saṅgha. In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are
committed to developing the meditation on mindfulness of breathing.

Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it
is very fruitful and
beneficial.[2140](endnotes.xhtml_note-2140){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2140
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Mindfulness of breathing, when developed
and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. The
four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven awakening factors,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very
fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their
presence.[2141](endnotes.xhtml_note-2141){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2141
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful,
they breathe
out.[2142](endnotes.xhtml_note-2142){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2142
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out
heavily.'[2143](endnotes.xhtml_note-2143){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2143
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm
breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing
out
lightly.'[2144](endnotes.xhtml_note-2144){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2144
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing the whole
body.'[2145](endnotes.xhtml_note-2145){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2145
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
stilling the physical process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe
out stilling the physical
process.'[2146](endnotes.xhtml_note-2146){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2146
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing
rapture.'[2147](endnotes.xhtml_note-2147){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2147
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing bliss.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing
bliss.'[2148](endnotes.xhtml_note-2148){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2148
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing mental processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe
out experiencing mental
processes.'[2149](endnotes.xhtml_note-2149){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2149
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
stilling mental processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
stilling mental
processes.'[2150](endnotes.xhtml_note-2150){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2150
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the
mind.'[2151](endnotes.xhtml_note-2151){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2151
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
gladdening the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
gladdening the
mind.'[2152](endnotes.xhtml_note-2152){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2152
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
immersing the mind in samādhi.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe
out immersing the mind in
samādhi.'[2153](endnotes.xhtml_note-2153){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2153
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
freeing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing
the
mind.'[2154](endnotes.xhtml_note-2154){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2154
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing
impermanence.'[2155](endnotes.xhtml_note-2155){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2155
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing fading
away.'[2156](endnotes.xhtml_note-2156){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2156
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing
cessation.'[2157](endnotes.xhtml_note-2157){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2157
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting
go.'[2158](endnotes.xhtml_note-2158){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2158
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?

Whenever a mendicant knows that they breathe heavily, or lightly, or
experiencing the whole body, or stilling physical processes---at that
time they're meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
For I say that the in-breaths and out-breaths are an aspect of the
body.[2159](endnotes.xhtml_note-2159){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2159
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why at that time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing rapture, or
experiencing bliss, or experiencing mental processes, or stilling mental
processes---at that time they meditate observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the world. For I say that careful application of mind to the
in-breaths and out-breaths is an aspect of
feelings.[2160](endnotes.xhtml_note-2160){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2160
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why at that time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing the mind, or
gladdening the mind, or immersing the mind in samādhi, or freeing the
mind---at that time they meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. There is no development of mindfulness of breathing for
someone who is unmindful and lacks awareness, I
say.[2161](endnotes.xhtml_note-2161){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2161
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why at that time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while observing impermanence,
or observing fading away, or observing cessation, or observing letting
go---at that time they meditate observing an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Having seen with wisdom the giving up of
covetousness and displeasure, they watch over closely with
equanimity.[2162](endnotes.xhtml_note-2162){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2162
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's why at that time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

That's how mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated,
fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening
factors?[2163](endnotes.xhtml_note-2163){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2163
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body, at
that time their mindfulness is established and lucid. At such a time, a
mendicant has activated the awakening factor of mindfulness; they
develop it and perfect
it.[2164](endnotes.xhtml_note-2164){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2164
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and
inquire into that principle with wisdom. At such a time, a mendicant has
activated the awakening factor of investigation of principles; they
develop it and perfect
it.[2165](endnotes.xhtml_note-2165){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2165
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is
roused up and unflagging. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the
awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it.

When they're energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises. At such a time,
a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop
it and perfect it.

When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
tranquility; they develop it and perfect it.

When the body is tranquil and they feel bliss, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening
factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it.

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. At such a time, a
mendicant has activated the awakening factor of equanimity; they develop
it and perfect it.

Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings ...
mind ... principles, at that time their mindfulness is established and
lucid. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
mindfulness ... investigation of principles ... energy ... rapture ...
tranquility ... immersion ... equanimity.

That's how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to fulfill knowledge and freedom?

It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting
go.[2166](endnotes.xhtml_note-2166){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2166
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That's how the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill knowledge and freedom."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn119">

### [MN 119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of the Body ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāyagatāsatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2167](endnotes.xhtml_note-2167){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2167
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat
together in the assembly hall and this discussion came up among them.

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing, how the Blessed One, who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha has said
that mindfulness of the body, when developed and cultivated, is very
fruitful and beneficial."

But their conversation was left unfinished. Then the Buddha came out of
retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat on the seat spread out and
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking
about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

So the mendicants told him what they had been talking about. The Buddha
said:

"And how, mendicants, is mindfulness of the body developed and
cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm
breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing
out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the
whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the
whole body.'They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the
physical process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling
the physical process.' As they meditate like this---diligent, keen, and
resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given
up.[2168](endnotes.xhtml_note-2168){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2168
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their mind becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in
samādhi.[2169](endnotes.xhtml_note-2169){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2169
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how a mendicant develops mindfulness
of the body.

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know 'I am walking'. When
standing they know 'I am standing'. When sitting they know 'I am
sitting'. And when lying down they know 'I am lying down'. Whatever
posture their body is in, they know it. As they meditate like
this---diligent, keen, and resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay
life are given up. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it settles,
unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant
develops mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out
and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and
extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when
eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating;
when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[2170](endnotes.xhtml_note-2170){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2170
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they meditate like this---diligent,
keen, and resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given
up. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and
becomes immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops
mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of filth. 'In this body there is head hair, body hair,
nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food,
feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva,
snot, synovial fluid, urine.'

It's as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with
various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas,
sesame, and ordinary rice. And someone with clear eyes were to open it
and examine the contents: 'These grains are fine rice, these are wheat,
these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are
ordinary rice.' In the same way, a mendicant examines their own body, up
from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped
in skin and full of many kinds of filth.
...[2171](endnotes.xhtml_note-2171){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2171
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} As they meditate like this---diligent,
keen, and resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given
up. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and
becomes immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops
mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement
or posture, according to the elements: 'In this body there is the earth
element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.'

It's as if a deft butcher or butcher's apprentice were to kill a cow and
sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into chops. In the same
way, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement or
posture, according to the elements: 'In this body there is the earth
element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.' As
they meditate like this---diligent, keen, and resolute---memories and
thoughts tied to lay life are given up. Their mind becomes stilled
internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. That
too is how a mendicant develops mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and festering. They'd compare it with their own body:
'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go
beyond that.' As they meditate like this---diligent, keen, and
resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given up. Their
mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes
immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops mindfulness of
the body.

Or suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground being
devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers, leopards,
jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. They'd compare it with
their own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind,
and cannot go beyond that.' That too is how a mendicant develops
mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ... A
skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ... A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews
... Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a
thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here
an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the
skull. ...

White bones, the color of shells ... Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile
... Bones rotted and crumbled to powder. They'd compare it with their
own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and
cannot go beyond that.' As they meditate like this---diligent, keen, and
resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given up. Their
mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes
immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops mindfulness of
the body.

Furthermore, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[2172](endnotes.xhtml_note-2172){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2172
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion.[2173](endnotes.xhtml_note-2173){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2173
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or
their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it
little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder
is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out;
yet no moisture oozes
out.[2174](endnotes.xhtml_note-2174){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2174
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, they drench, steep, fill,
and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of
seclusion. As they meditate like this---diligent, keen, and
resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given up. Their
mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes
immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops mindfulness of
the body.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born
of immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of
cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads
throughout the lake. There's no part of the lake that's not spread
through with cool
water.[2175](endnotes.xhtml_note-2175){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2175
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. That too is how a mendicant develops
mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. It's
like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of
them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not soaked
with cool
water.[2176](endnotes.xhtml_note-2176){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2176
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant drenches,
steeps, fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture. That too is how a mendicant develops mindfulness of the body.

Furthermore, a mendicant, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They sit
spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of
the body that's not filled with pure bright mind. It's like someone
sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There's no part of
the body that's not spread over with white
cloth.[2177](endnotes.xhtml_note-2177){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2177
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, they sit spreading their
body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of the body that's
not filled with pure bright mind. As they meditate like this---diligent,
keen, and resolute---memories and thoughts tied to lay life are given
up. Their mind becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and
becomes immersed in samādhi. That too is how a mendicant develops
mindfulness of the body.

Anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes
all of the skillful qualities that play a part in
realization.[2178](endnotes.xhtml_note-2178){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2178
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Anyone who brings into their mind the great
ocean includes all of the streams that run down into
it.[2179](endnotes.xhtml_note-2179){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2179
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, anyone who has developed
and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes all of the skillful
qualities that play a part in realization.

When a mendicant has not developed or cultivated mindfulness of the
body, Māra finds a vulnerability and gets hold of them. Suppose a person
were to throw a heavy stone ball at a mound of wet clay.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that heavy stone ball find an entry
into that mound of wet clay?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra finds a vulnerability and gets hold of
them.

Suppose there was a dried up, withered
log.[2180](endnotes.xhtml_note-2180){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2180
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a person comes along with a
drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and produce heat.

What do you think, mendicants? By drilling the stick against that dried
up, withered log, could they light a fire and produce heat?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra finds a vulnerability and gets hold of
them.

Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, empty and hollow. Then a
person comes along with a load of water.

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person pour water into the
jar?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra finds a vulnerability and gets hold of
them.

When a mendicant has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body,
Māra cannot find a vulnerability and doesn't get hold of them.

Suppose a person were to throw a light ball of string at a door-panel
made entirely of
hardwood.[2181](endnotes.xhtml_note-2181){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2181
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What do you think, mendicants? Would that light ball of string find an
entry into that door-panel made entirely of hardwood?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find a vulnerability and doesn't
get hold of them.

Suppose there was a green, sappy log. Then a person comes along with a
drill-stick, thinking to light a fire and produce heat.

What do you think, mendicants? By drilling the stick against that green,
sappy log on dry land far from water, could they light a fire and
produce heat?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find a vulnerability and doesn't
get hold of them. Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, full to the
brim so a crow could drink from
it.[2182](endnotes.xhtml_note-2182){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2182
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then a person comes along with a load of
water.

What do you think, mendicants? Could that person pour water into the
jar?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find a vulnerability and doesn't
get hold of them.

When a mendicant has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body,
they extend the mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can
be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing those things,
since each and every one is within range.

Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. If a strong man was to pour it on any side, would
water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, they extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within
range.[2183](endnotes.xhtml_note-2183){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2183
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a square, walled lotus pond on level ground, full to
the brim so a crow could drink from it. If a strong man was to open the
wall on any side, would water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, they extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within range.
Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad ready. A deft horse trainer, a master
charioteer, might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand
and goad in the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes,
whenever he wishes. In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and
cultivated mindfulness of the body, they extend the mind to realize by
insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they
are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is
within range.

You can expect ten benefits when mindfulness of the body has been
cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept
up, consolidated, and properly implemented.

They prevail over desire and discontent, and live having mastered desire
and discontent whenever they arose.

They prevail over fear and dread, and live having mastered fear and
dread whenever they arose.

They endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and
put up with physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again ... They control the body as far as the Brahmā realm.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. ...

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. ...

They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

You can expect these ten benefits when mindfulness of the body has been
cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept
up, consolidated, and properly implemented."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn120">

### [MN 120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rebirth by Choice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅkhārupapattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2184](endnotes.xhtml_note-2184){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2184
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"I shall teach you rebirth by
choice.[2185](endnotes.xhtml_note-2185){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2185
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.[2186](endnotes.xhtml_note-2186){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2186
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do
aristocrats!'[2187](endnotes.xhtml_note-2187){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2187
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They settle on that thought, stabilize it,
and develop it. Those choices and meditations of theirs, developed and
cultivated like this, lead to rebirth
there.[2188](endnotes.xhtml_note-2188){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2188
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the path and the practice that
leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up,
after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do brahmins ...
well-to-do householders.' They settle on that thought, stabilize it, and
develop it. Those choices and meditations of theirs, developed and
cultivated like this, lead to rebirth there. This is the path and the
practice that leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The gods of the four great
kings are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only,
when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of
the gods of the four great kings!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and meditations of theirs,
developed and cultivated like this, lead to rebirth there. This is the
path and the practice that leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The gods of the thirty-three
... the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to
imagine ... the gods who control what is imagined by others are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods who control what is imagined by others!' They settle on that
thought, stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and meditations of
theirs, developed and cultivated like this, lead to rebirth there. This
is the path and the practice that leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The Brahmā of a thousand is
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' Now the Brahmā of a thousand
meditates focused on pervading a thousandfold
galaxy,[2189](endnotes.xhtml_note-2189){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2189
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} as well as the sentient beings reborn
there. As a person might pick up a gallnut in their hand and examine it,
so too the Brahmā of a thousand meditates focused on pervading a
thousandfold galaxy, as well as the sentient beings reborn there. They
think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn
in the company of the Brahmā of a thousand!' They settle on that
thought, stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and meditations of
theirs, developed and cultivated like this, lead to rebirth
there.[2190](endnotes.xhtml_note-2190){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2190
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the path and the practice that
leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The Brahmā of two thousand
... the Brahmā of three thousand ... the Brahmā of four thousand ... the
Brahmā of five thousand is long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' Now
the Brahmā of five thousand meditates focused on pervading a
five-thousandfold galaxy, as well as the sentient beings reborn there.
As a person might pick up five gallnuts in their hand and examine them,
so too the Brahmā of five thousand meditates focused on pervading a
five-thousandfold galaxy, as well as the sentient beings reborn there.
They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be
reborn in the company of the Brahmā of five thousand!' They settle on
that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and
meditations of theirs, developed and cultivated like this, lead to
rebirth there. This is the path and the practice that leads to rebirth
there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The Brahmā of ten thousand
is long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' Now the Brahmā of ten
thousand meditates focused on pervading a ten-thousandfold galaxy, as
well as the sentient beings reborn there. Suppose there was a beryl gem
that was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked. When placed on
a cream rug it would shine and glow and radiate. In the same way the
Brahmā of ten thousand meditates focused on pervading a ten-thousandfold
galaxy, as well as the sentient beings reborn there. They think: 'If
only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the
company of the Brahmā of ten thousand!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and meditations of theirs,
developed and cultivated like this, lead to rebirth there. This is the
path and the practice that leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The Brahmā of a hundred
thousand is long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' Now the Brahmā of a
hundred thousand meditates focused on pervading a hundred-thousandfold
galaxy, as well as the sentient beings reborn there. Suppose there was a
pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned by a deft smith, well
wrought in the forge. When placed on a cream rug it would shine and glow
and
radiate.[2191](endnotes.xhtml_note-2191){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2191
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way the Brahmā of a hundred
thousand meditates focused on pervading a hundred-thousandfold galaxy,
as well as the sentient beings reborn there. They think: 'If only, when
my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
Brahmā of a hundred thousand!' They settle on that thought, stabilize
it, and develop it. Those choices and meditations of theirs, developed
and cultivated like this, lead to rebirth there. This is the path and
the practice that leads to rebirth there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. And they've heard: 'The radiant gods ... the
gods of limited radiance ... the gods of limitless radiance ... the gods
of streaming radiance ... the gods of limited beauty ... the gods of
limitless beauty ... the gods of universal beauty ... the gods of
abundant fruit ... the gods of Aviha ... the gods of Atappa ... the gods
fair to see ... the fair seeing gods ... the gods of Akaniṭṭha ... the
gods of the dimension of infinite space ... the gods of the dimension of
infinite consciousness ... the gods of the dimension of nothingness ...
the gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception!' They
settle on that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. Those choices and
meditations of theirs, developed and cultivated like this, lead to
rebirth there. This is the path and the practice that leads to rebirth
there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who has faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. They think: 'If only I might realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of
defilements.[2192](endnotes.xhtml_note-2192){#mn-anupadavagga.xhtml_noteref-2192
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And, mendicants, that mendicant is not
reborn anywhere."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>

[]{#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter Beginning with Emptiness {#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_mn-sunnatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn121">

### [MN 121]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷasuññatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2193](endnotes.xhtml_note-2193){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2193
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Ānanda came out of retreat and
went to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, this one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans
where they have a town named Townsville. There I heard and learned this
in the presence of the
Buddha:[2194](endnotes.xhtml_note-2194){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2194
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Ānanda, these days I usually practice the
meditation on
emptiness.'[2195](endnotes.xhtml_note-2195){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2195
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I trust I properly heard, learned, applied
the mind, and remembered that from the
Buddha?"[2196](endnotes.xhtml_note-2196){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2196
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Indeed, Ānanda, you properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and
remembered that. Now, as before, I usually practice the meditation on
emptiness.

Consider this stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother. It's empty of
elephants, cows, horses, and mares; of gold and silver; and of
gatherings of men and
women.[2197](endnotes.xhtml_note-2197){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2197
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There is only this that is not emptiness,
namely, the oneness dependent on the mendicant
Saṅgha.[2198](endnotes.xhtml_note-2198){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2198
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, a mendicant---ignoring the
perception of the village and the perception of people---focuses on the
oneness dependent on the perception of wilderness. Their mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided in that
perception of wilderness. They understand: 'Here there is no stress due
to the perception of village or the perception of
people.[2199](endnotes.xhtml_note-2199){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2199
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There is only this modicum of stress,
namely the oneness dependent on the perception of wilderness.' They
understand: 'This field of perception is empty of the perception of the
village. It is empty of the perception of people. There is only this
that is not emptiness, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of
wilderness.' And so they regard it as empty of what is not there, but as
to what remains they understand that it is
present.[2200](endnotes.xhtml_note-2200){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2200
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how emptiness manifests in
them---genuine, undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of people and the
perception of wilderness---focuses on the oneness dependent on the
perception of earth. Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided in that perception of earth. As a bull's hide
is rid of folds when fully stretched out by a hundred pegs, so too,
ignoring the hilly terrain, inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns,
and rugged mountains, they focus on the oneness dependent on the
perception of
earth.[2201](endnotes.xhtml_note-2201){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2201
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided in that perception of earth. They
understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the perception of people or
the perception of wilderness. There is only this modicum of stress,
namely the oneness dependent on the perception of earth.' They
understand: 'This field of perception is empty of the perception of
people. It is empty of the perception of wilderness. There is only this
that is not emptiness, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of
earth.' And so they regard it as empty of what is not there, but as to
what remains they understand that it is present. That's how emptiness
manifests in them---genuine, undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of wilderness and the
perception of earth---focuses on the oneness dependent on the perception
of the dimension of infinite
space.[2202](endnotes.xhtml_note-2202){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2202
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided in that perception of the dimension of
infinite space. They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the
perception of wilderness or the perception of earth. There is only this
modicum of stress, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of the
dimension of infinite space.' They understand: 'This field of perception
is empty of the perception of wilderness. It is empty of the perception
of earth. There is only this that is not emptiness, namely the oneness
dependent on the perception of the dimension of infinite space.' And so
they regard it as empty of what is not there, but as to what remains
they understand that it is present. That's how emptiness manifests in
them---genuine, undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of earth and the
perception of the dimension of infinite space---focuses on the oneness
dependent on the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness.
Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes
decided in that perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness.
They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the perception of earth
or the perception of the dimension of infinite space. There is only this
modicum of stress, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness.' They understand: 'This field of
perception is empty of the perception of earth. It is empty of the
perception of the dimension of infinite space. There is only this
modicum of stress, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness.' And so they regard it as empty of
what is not there, but as to what remains they understand that it is
present. That's how emptiness manifests in them---genuine, undistorted,
and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of the dimension of
infinite space and the perception of the dimension of infinite
consciousness---focuses on the oneness dependent on the perception of
the dimension of nothingness. Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided in that perception of the dimension of
nothingness. They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the
perception of the dimension of infinite space or the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness. There is only this modicum of
stress, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of the dimension
of nothingness.' They understand: 'This field of perception is empty of
the perception of the dimension of infinite space. It is empty of the
perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness. There is only
this that is not emptiness, namely the oneness dependent on the
perception of the dimension of nothingness.' And so they regard it as
empty of what is not there, but as to what remains they understand that
it is present. That's how emptiness manifests in them---genuine,
undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of the dimension of
infinite consciousness and the perception of the dimension of
nothingness---focuses on the oneness dependent on the perception of the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Their mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided in that
perception of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.
They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness or the perception of the dimension
of nothingness. There is only this modicum of stress, namely the oneness
dependent on the perception of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' They understand: 'This field of perception is empty of
the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness. It is empty
of the perception of the dimension of nothingness. There is only this
that is not emptiness, namely the oneness dependent on the perception of
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.' And so they
regard it as empty of what is not there, but as to what remains they
understand that it is present. That's how emptiness manifests in
them---genuine, undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of the dimension of
nothingness and the perception of the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception---focuses on the oneness dependent on the signless
immersion of the
heart.[2203](endnotes.xhtml_note-2203){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2203
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided in that signless immersion of the
heart. They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the perception
of the dimension of nothingness or the perception of the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. There is only this modicum of
stress, namely that related to the six sense fields dependent on this
body and conditioned by
life.'[2204](endnotes.xhtml_note-2204){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2204
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'This field of perception
is empty of the perception of the dimension of nothingness. It is empty
of the perception of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. There is only this that is not emptiness, namely that
related to the six sense fields dependent on this body and conditioned
by life.' And so they regard it as empty of what is not there, but as to
what remains they understand that it is present. That's how emptiness
manifests in them---genuine, undistorted, and pure.

Furthermore, a mendicant---ignoring the perception of the dimension of
nothingness and the perception of the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception---focuses on the oneness dependent on the signless
immersion of the heart. Their mind leaps forth, gains confidence,
settles down, and becomes decided in that signless immersion of the
heart. They understand: 'Even this signless immersion of the heart is
produced by choices and
intentions.'[2205](endnotes.xhtml_note-2205){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2205
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They understand: 'But whatever is produced
by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.'
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

They understand: 'Here there is no stress due to the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, or ignorance. There is only this
modicum of stress, namely that related to the six sense fields dependent
on this body and conditioned by life.' They understand: 'This field of
perception is empty of the perception of the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and
ignorance.[2206](endnotes.xhtml_note-2206){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2206
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There is only this that is not emptiness,
namely that related to the six sense fields dependent on this body and
conditioned by life.' And so they regard it as empty of what is not
there, but as to what remains they understand that it is present. That's
how emptiness manifests in them---genuine, undistorted, pure, and
supreme.

Whatever ascetics and brahmins enter and remain in the pure, ultimate,
supreme emptiness---whether in the past, future, or present---all of
them enter and remain in this same pure, ultimate, supreme
emptiness.[2207](endnotes.xhtml_note-2207){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2207
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So, Ānanda, you should train like this: 'We
will enter and remain in the pure, ultimate, supreme emptiness.' That's
how you should train."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn122">

### [MN 122]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Discourse on Emptiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsuññatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2208](endnotes.xhtml_note-2208){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2208
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree
Monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kapilavatthu for alms. He wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu.
After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the lodge of
the Sakyan Khemaka the Dark for the day's
meditation.[2209](endnotes.xhtml_note-2209){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2209
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time many resting places had been spread out at the lodge of
Khemaka the
Dark.[2210](endnotes.xhtml_note-2210){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2210
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha saw this, and wondered, "Many
resting places have been spread out; are there many mendicants living
here?"

Now at that time Venerable Ānanda, together with many other mendicants,
was making robes at the lodge of the Sakyan
Ghaṭā.[2211](endnotes.xhtml_note-2211){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2211
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came
out of retreat and went to Ghaṭā's lodge, where he sat on the seat
spread out and said to Venerable Ānanda, "Many resting places have been
spread out at the lodge of Khemaka the Dark; are many mendicants living
there?"

"Indeed there are, sir. It's currently the time for making
robes."[2212](endnotes.xhtml_note-2212){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2212
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Ānanda, a mendicant doesn't shine who enjoys company and groups, who
loves them and likes to enjoy them. It is quite impossible that such a
mendicant will get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or
difficulty.[2213](endnotes.xhtml_note-2213){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2213
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But you should expect that a mendicant who
lives alone, withdrawn from the group, will get the pleasure of
renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the
pleasure of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty.
That is possible.

Indeed, Ānanda, it is quite impossible that a mendicant who enjoys
company will enter and remain in the freedom of heart---either that
which is temporary and pleasant, or that which is irreversible and
unshakable.[2214](endnotes.xhtml_note-2214){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2214
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it is possible that a mendicant who
lives alone, withdrawn from the group will enter and remain in the
freedom of heart---either that which is temporary and pleasant, or that
which is irreversible and unshakable.

Ānanda, I do not see even a single sight which, with its decay and
perishing, would not give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress in someone who has desire and lust for
it.[2215](endnotes.xhtml_note-2215){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2215
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But this meditation has been understood by the Realized One, namely to
enter and remain in emptiness internally by not focusing on any
signs.[2216](endnotes.xhtml_note-2216){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2216
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, suppose that while the Realized One is
practicing this meditation, monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, rulers and
their ministers, monastics of other religions and their disciples go to
visit
him.[2217](endnotes.xhtml_note-2217){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2217
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In that case, with a mind slanting,
sloping, and inclining to seclusion, withdrawn, and loving renunciation,
having totally eliminated defiling influences, he invariably gives each
of them a talk emphasizing the topic of dismissal.

Therefore, if a mendicant should wish, 'May I enter and remain in
emptiness internally!' then they should still, settle, unify, and
immerse their mind in samādhi internally.

And how does a mendicant still, settle, unify, and immerse their mind in
samādhi internally?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. That's
how a mendicant stills, settles, unifies, and immerses their mind in
samādhi internally.

They focus on emptiness internally, but their mind does not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided. In that case, they
understand: 'I am focusing on emptiness internally, but my mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided.' In this
way they are aware of the
situation.[2218](endnotes.xhtml_note-2218){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2218
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They focus on emptiness externally ... They
focus on emptiness internally and externally ... They focus on the
imperturbable,[2219](endnotes.xhtml_note-2219){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2219
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but their mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided. In that case, they
understand: 'I am focusing on the imperturbable internally, but my mind
does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided.'
In this way they are aware of the situation.

Then that mendicant should still, settle, unify, and immerse their mind
in samādhi internally using the same meditation subject as a basis of
immersion that they used
before.[2220](endnotes.xhtml_note-2220){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2220
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They focus on emptiness
internally,[2221](endnotes.xhtml_note-2221){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2221
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and their mind leaps forth, gains
confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. In that case, they
understand: 'I am focusing on emptiness internally, and my mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.' In this way
they are aware of the situation. They focus on emptiness externally ...
They focus on emptiness internally and externally ... They focus on the
imperturbable, and their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided. In that case, they understand: 'I am focusing
on the imperturbable, and my mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided.' In this way they are aware of the situation.

While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if their mind
inclines to walking, they walk,
thinking:[2222](endnotes.xhtml_note-2222){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2222
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'While I'm walking, bad, unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure will not overwhelm me.' In
this way they are aware of the situation. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if their mind inclines to standing, they
stand, thinking: 'While I'm standing, bad, unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure will not overwhelm me.' In this way they
are aware of the situation. While a mendicant is practicing such a
meditation, if their mind inclines to sitting, they sit, thinking:
'While I'm sitting, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure will not overwhelm me.' In this way they are aware of the
situation. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if their
mind inclines to lying down, they lie down, thinking: 'While I'm lying
down, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure will not
overwhelm me.' In this way they are aware of the situation.

While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if their mind
inclines to talking, they think: 'I will not engage in the kind of
speech that is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. Such speech
doesn't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. Namely: talk about kings, bandits, and
ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink,
clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about
family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about
women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed;
motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this
or that place.' In this way they are aware of the situation. 'But I will
take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart and
leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom.' In this way
they are aware of the situation.

While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if their mind
inclines to thinking, they think: 'I will not think the kind of thought
that is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. Such thoughts
don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. That is, sensual, malicious, or cruel
thoughts.' In this way they are aware of the situation. 'But I will
think the kind of thought that is noble and emancipating, and brings one
who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. That is, thoughts
of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.' In this way they are
aware of the situation.

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights
known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the
nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which
are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.
These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

So a mendicant should regularly check their own mind: 'Does my mind take
an interest in any of these five kinds of sensual stimulation?' Suppose
that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'My mind does take an
interest.' In that case, they understand: 'I have not given up desire
and greed for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.' In this way they
are aware of the
situation.[2223](endnotes.xhtml_note-2223){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2223
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But suppose that, upon checking, a
mendicant knows this: 'My mind does not take an interest.' In that case,
they understand: 'I have given up desire and greed for the five kinds of
sensual stimulation.' In this way they are aware of the situation.

A mendicant should meditate observing rise and fall in these five
grasping aggregates: 'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is
the ending of form. Such is feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are
choices ... Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness,
such is the ending of consciousness.'

As they do so, they give up the conceit 'I am' regarding the five
grasping
aggregates.[2224](endnotes.xhtml_note-2224){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2224
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In that case, they understand: 'I have
given up the conceit "I am" regarding the five grasping aggregates.' In
this way they are aware of the situation.

These principles are entirely skillful, with skillful outcomes; they are
noble, transcendent, and inaccessible to the Wicked One.

What do you think, Ānanda? For what reason would a disciple deem it
worthwhile to follow the Teacher, even if sent away?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"A disciple would not deem it worthwhile to follow the Teacher for the
sake of this, namely statements, mixed prose & verse, or
discussions.[2225](endnotes.xhtml_note-2225){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2225
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because for a long time you
have learned the teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them
theoretically.[2226](endnotes.xhtml_note-2226){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2226
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But a disciple would deem it worthwhile to
follow the Teacher, even if sent away, for the sake of talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart and leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom,
freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom.[2227](endnotes.xhtml_note-2227){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2227
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This being so, Ānanda, there is a peril for the tutor, a peril for the
student, and a peril for a spiritual practitioner.

And how is there a peril for the
tutor?[2228](endnotes.xhtml_note-2228){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2228
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when some teacher frequents a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. While
meditating withdrawn, they're visited by a stream of brahmins and
householders, and people of town and
country.[2229](endnotes.xhtml_note-2229){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2229
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When this happens, they enjoy infatuation,
fall into greed, and return to indulgence. This is said to the tutor's
peril.[2230](endnotes.xhtml_note-2230){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2230
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They're ruined by bad, unskillful qualities
that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in
suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. That's how there is a
peril for the tutor.

And how is there a peril for the student? It's when the student of a
teacher, emulating their teacher's fostering of seclusion, frequents a
secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a
mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw. While meditating withdrawn, they're visited by a stream of
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country. When this
happens, they enjoy infatuation, fall into greed, and return to
indulgence. This student is said to be imperiled by the student's peril.
They're ruined by bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading
to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old
age, and death. That's how there is a peril for the student.

And how is there a peril for a spiritual practitioner? It's when a
Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed. He frequents a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the
root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a
forest, the open air, a heap of straw. While meditating withdrawn, he's
visited by a stream of brahmins and householders, and people of town and
country. When this happens, he doesn't enjoy infatuation, fall into
greed, and return to indulgence. But a disciple of this teacher,
emulating their teacher's fostering of seclusion, frequents a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. While
meditating withdrawn, they're visited by a stream of brahmins and
householders, and people of town and country. When this happens, they
enjoy infatuation, fall into greed, and return to indulgence. This
spiritual practitioner is said to be imperiled by the spiritual
practitioner's peril. They're ruined by bad, unskillful qualities that
are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering
and future rebirth, old age, and death. That's how there is a peril for
the spiritual practitioner.

And in this context, Ānanda, as compared to the peril of the tutor or
the student, the peril of the spiritual practitioner has more painful,
bitter results, and even leads to the underworld.

So, Ānanda, treat me as a friend, not as an enemy. That will be for your
lasting welfare and happiness.

And how do disciples treat their Teacher as an enemy, not a friend? It's
when the Teacher teaches Dhamma to his disciples out of kindness and
sympathy: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.' But
their disciples don't want to listen. They don't actively listen or try
to understand. They proceed having turned away from the Teacher's
instruction. That's how the disciples treat their Teacher as an enemy,
not a friend.

And how do disciples treat their Teacher as a friend, not an enemy? It's
when the Teacher teaches Dhamma to his disciples out of kindness and
sympathy: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.' And
their disciples want to listen. They actively listen and try to
understand. They don't proceed having turned away from the Teacher's
instruction. That's how the disciples treat their Teacher as a friend,
not an enemy.

So, Ānanda, treat me as a friend, not as an enemy. That will be for your
lasting welfare and happiness. I shall not mollycoddle you like a potter
with their damp, unfired
pots.[2231](endnotes.xhtml_note-2231){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2231
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I shall speak, correcting you again and
again, pressing you again and again. The core will stand the test."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn123">

### [MN 123]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Incredible and Amazing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Acchariyaabbhutasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat
together in the assembly hall and this discussion came up among them:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! The Realized One has such
psychic power and might! For he is able to know the Buddhas of the past
who have become completely quenched, cut off proliferation, cut off the
track, finished off the cycle, and transcended all suffering. He knows
their birth, names, clans, conduct, teaching, wisdom, meditation, and
freedom."[2232](endnotes.xhtml_note-2232){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2232
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When they said this, Venerable Ānanda said, "The Realized Ones are
incredible, reverends, and they have incredible qualities. They're
amazing, and they have amazing
qualities."[2233](endnotes.xhtml_note-2233){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2233
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But this conversation among those
mendicants was left unfinished.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to the
assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now?
What conversation was left unfinished?"

So the mendicants told him what they had been talking about. The Buddha
said, "Well then, Ānanda, say some more about the incredible and amazing
qualities of the Realized One."

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Mindful and aware, the being intent on awakening was reborn in the host
of joyful
gods.'[2234](endnotes.xhtml_note-2234){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2234
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This I remember as an incredible quality of
the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'Mindful and aware,
the being intent on awakening remained in the host of joyful gods.' This
too I remember as an incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'For the whole of
that life, the being intent on awakening remained in the host of joyful
gods.' This too I remember as an incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'Mindful and aware,
the being intent on awakening passed away from the host of joyful gods
and was conceived in his mother's
womb.'[2235](endnotes.xhtml_note-2235){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2235
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening passes away from the host of joyful gods, he is
conceived in his mother's womb. And then---in this world with its gods,
Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods
and humans---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the
glory of the gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so
utterly dark that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and
powerful, makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears, surpassing the glory of the
gods.[2236](endnotes.xhtml_note-2236){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2236
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And even the sentient beings reborn there
recognize each other by that light: "So, it seems other sentient beings
have been reborn
here!"[2237](endnotes.xhtml_note-2237){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2237
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And this ten-thousandfold galaxy shakes and
rocks and trembles. And an immeasurable, magnificent light appears in
the world, surpassing the glory of the gods.' This too I remember as an
incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening is conceived in his mother's belly, four gods
approach to guard the four quarters, so that no human or non-human or
anyone at all shall harm the being intent on awakening or his
mother.'[2238](endnotes.xhtml_note-2238){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2238
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening is conceived in his mother's belly, she becomes
naturally ethical. She refrains from killing living creatures, stealing,
sexual misconduct, lying, and alcoholic drinks that cause
negligence.'[2239](endnotes.xhtml_note-2239){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2239
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening is conceived in his mother's belly, she no longer
feels sexual desire for men, and she cannot be violated by a man of
lustful intent.' This too I remember as an incredible quality of the
Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening is conceived in his mother's belly, she obtains the
five kinds of sensual stimulation and amuses herself, supplied and
provided with
them.'[2240](endnotes.xhtml_note-2240){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2240
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening is conceived in his mother's belly, no afflictions
beset her. She's happy and free of bodily fatigue. And she sees the
being intent on awakening in her womb, whole in his major and minor
limbs, not deficient in any faculty. Suppose there was a beryl gem that
was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked. And it was strung
with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. And someone
with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: "This
beryl gem is naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked. And it's
strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown."

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, no afflictions beset her. She's happy and free of bodily
fatigue. And she sees the being intent on awakening in her womb, whole
in his major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty.' This too I
remember as an incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'Seven days after the
being intent on awakening is born, his mother passes away and is reborn
in the host of joyful
gods.'[2241](endnotes.xhtml_note-2241){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2241
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'Other women carry
the infant in the womb for nine or ten months before giving birth. Not
so the mother of the being intent on awakening. She gives birth after
exactly ten
months.'[2242](endnotes.xhtml_note-2242){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2242
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'Other women give
birth while sitting or lying down. Not so the mother of the being intent
on awakening. She only gives birth standing
up.'[2243](endnotes.xhtml_note-2243){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2243
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening emerges from his mother's womb, gods receive him
first, then humans.' This too I remember as an incredible quality of the
Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening emerges from his mother's womb, before he reaches
the ground, four gods receive him and place him before his mother,
saying: "Rejoice, O Queen! An illustrious son is born to you."' This too
I remember as an incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening emerges from his mother's womb, he emerges already
clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus, blood, or any other kind of impurity,
pure and clean. Suppose a jewel-treasure was placed on a cloth from
Kāsi. The jewel would not soil the cloth, nor would the cloth soil the
jewel.[2244](endnotes.xhtml_note-2244){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2244
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because of the cleanliness of
them both.

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, he emerges already clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus,
blood, or any other kind of impurity, pure and clean.' This too I
remember as an incredible quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening emerges from his mother's womb, two showers of water
appear from the sky, one cool, one warm, for bathing the being intent on
awakening and his mother.' This too I remember as an incredible quality
of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'As soon as he's
born, the being intent on awakening stands firm with his own feet on the
ground. Facing north, he takes seven strides with a white parasol held
above him, surveys all quarters, and makes this dramatic proclamation:
"I am the foremost in the world! I am the eldest in the world! I am the
first in the world! This is my last rebirth. Now there are no more
future
lives."'[2245](endnotes.xhtml_note-2245){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2245
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This too I remember as an incredible
quality of the Buddha.

I have learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'When the being
intent on awakening emerges from his mother's womb, then---in this world
with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and
brahmins, gods and humans---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears,
surpassing the glory of the gods. Even in the boundless void of
interstellar space---so utterly dark that even the light of the moon and
the sun, so mighty and powerful, makes no impression---an immeasurable,
magnificent light appears, surpassing the glory of the gods. And the
sentient beings reborn there recognize each other by that light: "So, it
seems other sentient beings have been reborn here!" And this
ten-thousandfold galaxy shakes and rocks and trembles. And an
immeasurable, magnificent light appears in the world, surpassing the
glory of the gods.' This too I remember as an incredible and amazing
quality of the
Buddha."[2246](endnotes.xhtml_note-2246){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2246
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, Ānanda, you should also remember this as an incredible and
amazing quality of the Realized One. It's that the Realized One knows
feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go
away.[2247](endnotes.xhtml_note-2247){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2247
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He knows perceptions as they arise, as they
remain, and as they go away. He knows thoughts as they arise, as they
remain, and as they go away. This too you should remember as an
incredible and amazing quality of the Realized One."

"Sir, the Buddha knows feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as
they go away. He knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as
they go away. He knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as
they go away. This too I remember as an incredible and amazing quality
of the Buddha."

That's what Ānanda said, and the teacher approved. Satisfied, those
mendicants approved what Venerable Ānanda said.

</article>
<article id="mn124">

### [MN 124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bakkula ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bākulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2248](endnotes.xhtml_note-2248){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2248
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Bakkula was
staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

Then the naked ascetic Kassapa, an old friend of Bakkula in the lay
life, approached him, and exchanged greetings with
him.[2249](endnotes.xhtml_note-2249){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2249
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Venerable Bakkula,
"Reverend Bakkula, how long has it been since you went forth?"

"It has been eighty years,
reverend."[2250](endnotes.xhtml_note-2250){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2250
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But in these eighty years, how many times have you had sex?"

"You shouldn't ask me such a question. Rather, you should ask me this:
'But in these eighty years, how many times have sensual perceptions ever
arisen in you?'"

"But in these eighty years, how many times have sensual perceptions ever
arisen in
you?"[2251](endnotes.xhtml_note-2251){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2251
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In these eighty years, I don't recall that any sensual perception has
ever arisen in me."

*This we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.[2252](endnotes.xhtml_note-2252){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2252
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}*

"In these eighty years, I don't recall that any perception of ill will
... or cruelty has ever arisen in me."

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

"In these eighty years, I don't recall that any thought of sensuality
... ill will ... or cruelty has ever arisen in me."

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

"In these eighty years, I don't recall accepting a robe from a
householder
...[2253](endnotes.xhtml_note-2253){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2253
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} cutting a robe with a knife
...[2254](endnotes.xhtml_note-2254){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2254
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} sewing a robe with a needle ... dying a
robe ... sewing a robe during the robe-making ceremony ... wandering to
look for robe material for my companions in the spiritual life when they
are making robes
...[2255](endnotes.xhtml_note-2255){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2255
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} accepting an invitation
...[2256](endnotes.xhtml_note-2256){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2256
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} having such a thought: 'If only someone
would invite me!' ... sitting down inside a house
...[2257](endnotes.xhtml_note-2257){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2257
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} eating inside a house ... getting caught up
in the details of female's appearance
...[2258](endnotes.xhtml_note-2258){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2258
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} teaching a female, even so much as a four
line verse
...[2259](endnotes.xhtml_note-2259){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2259
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} going to the nuns' quarters
...[2260](endnotes.xhtml_note-2260){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2260
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} teaching the nuns
...[2261](endnotes.xhtml_note-2261){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2261
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} teaching the trainee nuns ... teaching the
novice nuns ... giving the going forth
...[2262](endnotes.xhtml_note-2262){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2262
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} giving the ordination ... giving dependence
... being looked after by a novice ... bathing in the sauna
...[2263](endnotes.xhtml_note-2263){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2263
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} bathing with bath powder
...[2264](endnotes.xhtml_note-2264){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2264
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} looking for a massage from my companions in
the spiritual life
...[2265](endnotes.xhtml_note-2265){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2265
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} being ill, even for as long as it takes to
pull a cow's udder
...[2266](endnotes.xhtml_note-2266){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2266
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} being presented with medicine, even as much
as a bit of yellow myrobalan
...[2267](endnotes.xhtml_note-2267){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2267
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} leaning on a leaning-board
...[2268](endnotes.xhtml_note-2268){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2268
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} preparing a cot
..."[2269](endnotes.xhtml_note-2269){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2269
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

"In these eighty years, I don't recall commencing the rainy season
residence within a village."

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

"Reverend, for seven days I ate the nation's almsfood as a
debtor.[2270](endnotes.xhtml_note-2270){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2270
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then on the eighth day I became
enlightened."

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

"Reverend Bakkula, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in this
teaching and training?" And the naked ascetic Kassapa received the going
forth, the ordination in this teaching and training.

Not long after his ordination, Venerable Kassapa, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end
of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with
his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the
lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Kassapa became one of the perfected.

Then some time later Venerable Bakkula, taking a latchkey, went from
dwelling to dwelling,
saying,[2271](endnotes.xhtml_note-2271){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2271
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Come forth, venerables, come forth! Today
will be my full extinguishment."

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

And Venerable Bakkula became fully quenched while seated right in the
middle of the Saṅgha.

*This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable
Bakkula.*

</article>
<article id="mn125">

### [MN 125]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Level of the Tamed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dantabhūmisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2272](endnotes.xhtml_note-2272){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2272
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time the novice Aciravata was staying in a wilderness hut.
Then as Prince Jayasena was going for a walk he approached Aciravata,
and exchanged greetings with
him.[2273](endnotes.xhtml_note-2273){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2273
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Aciravata, "Mister Aggivessana, I have heard
that[2274](endnotes.xhtml_note-2274){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2274
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} a mendicant who meditates diligently,
keenly, and resolutely can experience unification of mind."

"That's so true, Prince! That's so true! A mendicant who meditates
diligently, keenly, and resolutely can experience unification of mind."

"Mister Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and
memorized it."

"I'm not competent to do so,
Prince.[2275](endnotes.xhtml_note-2275){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2275
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For if I were to teach you the Dhamma as I
have learned and memorized it, you might not understand the meaning,
which would be wearying and troublesome for me."

"Mister Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and
memorized it. Hopefully I will understand the meaning of what you say."

"I shall teach you. If you understand the meaning of what I say, that's
good. If not, then leave each to his own, and do not question me about
it further."

"Mister Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and
memorized it. If I understand the meaning of what you say, that's good.
If not, then I will leave each to his own, and not question you about it
further."

Then the novice Aciravata taught Prince Jayasena the Dhamma as he had
learned and memorized it. When he had spoken, Jayasena said to him, "It
is impossible, Mister Aggivessana, it cannot happen that a mendicant who
meditates diligently, keenly, and resolutely can experience unification
of mind." Having declared that this was impossible, Jayasena got up from
his seat and left.

Not long after he had left, Aciravata went to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him,

"How could it possibly be otherwise,
Aggivessana?[2276](endnotes.xhtml_note-2276){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2276
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Prince Jayasena dwells in the midst of
sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning
with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It's simply impossible
for him to know or see or realize what can only be known, seen, and
realized by
renunciation.[2277](endnotes.xhtml_note-2277){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2277
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose there was a pair of elephants or horse or oxen in training who
were well tamed and well trained. And there was a pair who were not
tamed or trained. What do you think, Aggivessana? Wouldn't the pair that
was well tamed and well trained perform the tasks of the tamed and reach
the level of the tamed?"

"Yes, sir."

"But would the pair that was not tamed and trained perform the tasks of
the tamed and reach the level of the tamed, just like the tamed pair?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, Prince Jayasena dwells in the midst of sensual
pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with
fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It's simply impossible for him
to know or see or realize what can only be known, seen, and realized by
renunciation.

Suppose there was a big mountain not far from a town or
village.[2278](endnotes.xhtml_note-2278){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2278
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And two friends set out from that village
or town, lending each other a hand up to the mountain. Once there, one
friend would remain at the foot of the mountain, while the other would
climb to the
peak.[2279](endnotes.xhtml_note-2279){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2279
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The one standing at the foot would say to
the one at the peak, 'My friend, what do you see, standing there at the
peak?' They'd reply, 'Standing at the peak, I see delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!'

But the other would say, 'It's impossible, it cannot happen that,
standing at the peak, you can see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and
lotus ponds.' So their friend would come down from the peak, take their
friend by the arm, and make them climb to the peak. After giving them a
minute to catch their breath, they'd say, 'My friend, what do you see,
standing here at the peak?' They'd reply, 'Standing at the peak, I see
delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!'

They'd say, 'Just now I understood you to say: "It's impossible, it
cannot happen that, standing at the peak, you can see delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds." But now you say: "Standing at the
peak, I see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!"' They'd
say, 'But my friend, it was because I was obstructed by this big
mountain that I didn't see what could be seen.'

But bigger than that is the mass of ignorance by which Prince Jayasena
is veiled, shrouded, covered, and engulfed. Prince Jayasena dwells in
the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of
them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It is quite
impossible for him to know or see or realize what can only be known,
seen, and realized by renunciation. It would be no wonder if, had these
two similes occurred to you, Prince Jayasena would have gained
confidence in you and shown his confidence."

"But sir, how could these two similes have occurred to me as they did to
the Buddha, since they were neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned
before in the past?"

"Suppose, Aggivessana, an anointed aristocratic king was to address his
elephant tracker, 'Please, my good elephant tracker, mount the royal
bull elephant and enter the elephant wood. When you see a wild bull
elephant, tether it by the neck to the royal elephant.' 'Yes, Your
Majesty,' replied the elephant tracker, and did as he was asked. The
royal elephant leads the wild elephant out into the open; and it's only
then that it comes out into the open, for a wild bull elephant clings to
the elephant wood. The elephant tracker informs the king, 'Sire, the
wild elephant has come out into the open.' Then the king addresses his
elephant trainer, 'Please, my good elephant trainer, tame the wild bull
elephant. Subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and
its wild stress, weariness, and fever. Make it happy to be within a
village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the elephant trainer. He dug a large post
into the earth and tethered the elephant to it by the neck, so as to
subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and its wild
stress, weariness, and fever, and to make it happy to be within a
village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans. He spoke in a way
that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite,
likable and agreeable to the people. Spoken to in such a way by the
elephant trainer, the wild elephant wanted to listen. It actively
listened and tried to understand. So the elephant trainer rewards it
with grass, fodder, and water.

When the wild elephant accepts the grass, fodder, and water, the trainer
knows, 'Now the wild elephant will survive!' He sets it a further task:
'Pick it up, sir! Put it down, sir!' When the wild elephant picks up and
puts down when the trainer says, following instructions, the trainer
sets it a further task: 'Forward, sir! Back, sir!' When the wild
elephant goes forward and back when the trainer says, following
instructions, the trainer sets it a further task: 'Stand, sir! Sit,
sir!'

When the wild elephant stands and sits when the trainer says, following
instructions, the trainer sets the task called imperturbability. He
fastens a large plank to its trunk; a lancer sits on its neck; other
lancers surround it on all sides; and the trainer himself stands in
front with a long lance. While practicing this task, it doesn't budge
its fore-feet or hind-feet, its fore-quarters or hind-quarters, its
head, ears, tusks, tail, or trunk. The wild bull elephant endures being
struck by spears, swords, arrows, and axes; it endures the thunder of
the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. Rid of all crooks and flaws,
and purged of defects, it is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, Aggivessana, a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened,
blessed.[2280](endnotes.xhtml_note-2280){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2280
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He realizes with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect, 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?'

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or
small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. And it's only
then that a noble disciple comes out into the open, for gods and humans
cling to the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The Realized One guides them further: 'Come, mendicant, be ethical and
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've undertaken.'

When they have ethical conduct, the Realized One guides them further:
'Come, mendicant, guard your sense doors. When you see a sight with your
eyes, don't get caught up in the features and details. ...

(Tell in full as in MN 107, the Discourse with Moggallāna the
Accountant.)

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then they meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. It's like when the elephant trainer dug a
large post into the earth and tethered the elephant to it by the neck,
so as to subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and
its wild stress, weariness, and fever, and to make it happy to be within
a village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans. In the same way, a
noble disciple has these four kinds of mindfulness meditation as tethers
for the mind so as to subdue behaviors tied to lay life, memories and
thoughts tied to lay life, stress, weariness, and fever tied to lay
life, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

The Realized One guides them further: 'Come, mendicant, meditate
observing an aspect of the body, but don't think thoughts connected with
sensual
pleasures.[2281](endnotes.xhtml_note-2281){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2281
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles, but don't think thoughts connected with sensual
pleasures.'

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption
...[2282](endnotes.xhtml_note-2282){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2282
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they know
they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

Such a mendicant endures cold, heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of
flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; rude and unwelcome
criticism; and puts up with physical pain---sharp, severe, acute,
unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening. Rid of all greed, hate,
and delusion, and purged of defects, they are worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme
field of merit for the world.

If a royal bull elephant passes away untamed and untrained---whether in
their old age, middle age, or youth---they're considered a royal bull
elephant who passed away untamed. In the same way, if a mendicant passes
away without having ended the defilements---whether as a senior, middle,
or junior---they're considered as a mendicant who passed away untamed.

If a royal bull elephant passes away tamed and trained---whether in
their old age, middle age, or youth---they're considered a royal bull
elephant who passed away tamed. In the same way, if a mendicant passes
away having ended the defilements---whether as a senior, middle, or
junior---they're considered as a mendicant who passed away
tamed."[2283](endnotes.xhtml_note-2283){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2283
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the novice Aciravata approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn126">

### [MN 126]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bhūmija ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhūmijasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then Venerable Bhūmija robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of Prince Jayasena, where he sat on the seat
spread
out.[2284](endnotes.xhtml_note-2284){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2284
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Jayasena approached and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to Bhūmija:

"Mister Bhūmija, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view: 'If you make a wish and lead the spiritual life, you
can't win the
fruit.[2285](endnotes.xhtml_note-2285){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2285
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If you don't make a wish and lead the
spiritual life, you can't win the fruit. If you both make a wish and
don't make a wish and lead the spiritual life, you can't win the fruit.
If you neither make a wish nor don't make a wish and lead the spiritual
life, you can't win the fruit.' What does Mister Bhūmija's Teacher say
about this? How does he explain it?"

"Prince, I haven't heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha.[2286](endnotes.xhtml_note-2286){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2286
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But it's possible that he might explain it
like this: 'If you lead the spiritual life irrationally, you can't win
the fruit, regardless of whether you make a
wish,[2287](endnotes.xhtml_note-2287){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2287
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} you don't make a wish, you both do and do
not make a wish, or you neither do nor don't make a wish. But if you
lead the spiritual life rationally, you can win the fruit, regardless of
whether you make a wish, you don't make a wish, you both do and do not
make a wish, or you neither do nor don't make a wish.' I haven't heard
and learned this in the presence of the Buddha. But it's possible that
he might explain it like that."

"If that's what your teacher says, Mister Bhūmija, he clearly stands
head and shoulders above all the various other ascetics and brahmins."
Then Prince Jayasena served Venerable Bhūmija from his own dish.

Then after the meal, on his return from almsround, Bhūmija went to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him all that had happened,
adding: "Answering this way, I trust that I repeated what the Buddha has
said, and didn't misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my
explanation was in line with the teaching, and that there are no
legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, Bhūmija, in answering this way you repeated what I've said, and
didn't misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation was in line
with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or
criticism.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, and wrong immersion. If they lead the spiritual life, they
can't win the fruit, regardless of whether they make a wish, they don't
make a wish, they both do and do not make a wish, or they neither do nor
don't make a wish. Why is that? Because that's an irrational way to win
the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of oil. While wandering in search of
oil, they tried heaping sand in a bucket, sprinkling it thoroughly with
water, and pressing it out. But by doing this, they couldn't extract any
oil, regardless of whether they made a wish, didn't make a wish, both
did and did not make a wish, or neither did nor did not make a wish. Why
is that? Because that's an irrational way to extract oil.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. If they lead the spiritual life,
they can't win the fruit, regardless of whether or not they make a wish.
Why is that? Because that's an irrational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of milk. While wandering in search of
milk, they tried pulling the horn of a newly-calved cow. But by doing
this, they couldn't get any milk, regardless of whether they made a
wish, didn't make a wish, both did and did not make a wish, or neither
did nor did not make a wish. Why is that? Because that's an irrational
way to get milk.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view ...
Because that's an irrational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of butter. While wandering in search
of butter, they tried pouring water into a pot and churning it with a
stick. But by doing this, they couldn't produce any butter, regardless
of whether they made a wish, didn't make a wish, both did and did not
make a wish, or neither did nor did not make a wish. Why is that?
Because that's an irrational way to produce butter.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view ...
Because that's an irrational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of fire. While wandering in search of
fire, they tried drilling a green, sappy log with a drill-stick. But by
doing this, they couldn't start a fire, regardless of whether they made
a wish, didn't make a wish, both did and did not make a wish, or neither
did nor did not make a wish. Why is that? Because that's an irrational
way to start a fire.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view ...
Because that's an irrational way to win the fruit.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. If they lead the spiritual life, they
can win the fruit, regardless of whether they make a wish, they don't
make a wish, they both do and do not make a wish, or they neither do nor
do not make a wish. Why is that? Because that's a rational way to win
the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of oil. While wandering in search of
oil, they tried heaping sesame flour in a bucket, sprinkling it
thoroughly with water, and pressing it out. By doing this, they could
extract oil, regardless of whether they made a wish, didn't make a wish,
both did and did not make a wish, or neither did nor did not make a
wish. Why is that? Because that's a rational way to extract oil.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have right view ...
Because that's a rational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of milk. While wandering in search of
milk, they tried pulling the udder of a newly-calved cow. By doing this,
they could get milk, regardless of whether they made a wish, didn't make
a wish, both did and did not make a wish, or neither did nor did not
make a wish. Why is that? Because that's a rational way to get milk.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have right view ...
Because that's a rational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of butter. While wandering in search
of butter, they tried pouring curds into a pot and churning them with a
stick. By doing this, they could produce butter, regardless of whether
they made a wish, didn't make a wish, both did and did not make a wish,
or neither did nor did not make a wish. Why is that? Because that's a
rational way to produce butter.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have right view ...
Because that's a rational way to win the fruit.

Suppose there was a person in need of fire. While wandering in search of
fire, they tried drilling a dried up, withered log with a drill-stick.
By doing this, they could start a fire, regardless of whether they made
a wish, didn't make a wish, both did and did not make a wish, or neither
did nor did not make a wish. Why is that? Because that's a rational way
to start a fire.

And so it is for any ascetics and brahmins who have right view ...
Because that's a rational way to win the fruit.

Bhūmija, it would be no wonder if, had these four similes occurred to
you, Prince Jayasena would have gained confidence in you and shown his
confidence."[2288](endnotes.xhtml_note-2288){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2288
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"But sir, how could these four similes have occurred to me as they did
to the Buddha, since they were neither supernaturally inspired, nor
learned before in the
past?"[2289](endnotes.xhtml_note-2289){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2289
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Bhūmija approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn127">

### [MN 127]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Anuruddha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuruddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

And then the chamberlain Pañcakaṅga addressed a
man,[2290](endnotes.xhtml_note-2290){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2290
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Please, mister, go to Venerable Anuruddha,
and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him, 'Sir, the
chamberlain Pañcakaṅga bows with his head to your feet.' And then ask
him whether he might please accept tomorrow's meal from Pañcakaṅga
together with the mendicant Saṅgha. And ask whether he might please come
earlier than usual, for Pañcakaṅga has many duties, and much work to do
for the king."

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Pañcakaṅga asked, and Venerable
Anuruddha consented with silence.

Then when the night had passed, Anuruddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went to Pañcakaṅga's home, where he sat on the
seat spread out. Then Pañcakaṅga served and satisfied Anuruddha with his
own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. When Anuruddha had
eaten and washed his hands and bowl, Pañcakaṅga took a low seat, sat to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, some senior mendicants have come to me and said, 'Householder,
develop the limitless release of heart.' Others have said, 'Householder,
develop the expansive release of heart.' Now, the limitless release of
the heart and the expansive release of the heart: do these things differ
in both meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ
only in the
phrasing?"[2291](endnotes.xhtml_note-2291){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2291
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well then, householder, let me know what you think about this.
Afterwards you'll get it without
fail."[2292](endnotes.xhtml_note-2292){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2292
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Sir, this is what I think. The limitless release of the heart and the
expansive release of the heart mean the same thing, and differ only in
the phrasing."

"The limitless release of the heart and the expansive release of the
heart differ in both meaning and phrasing. This is a way to understand
how these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.

And what is the limitless release of the
heart?[2293](endnotes.xhtml_note-2293){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2293
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant meditates spreading a
heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate spreading a heart
full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. This is called the limitless release of the heart.

And what is the expansive release of the
heart?[2294](endnotes.xhtml_note-2294){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2294
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when a mendicant meditates focused on
pervading the extent of a single tree root as
expansive.[2295](endnotes.xhtml_note-2295){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2295
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called the expansive release of the
heart. Also, a mendicant meditates focused on pervading the extent of
two or three tree roots ... a single village district ... two or three
village districts ... a single kingdom ... two or three kingdoms ...
this land surrounded by ocean. This too is called the expansive release
of the heart. This is a way to understand how these things differ in
both meaning and phrasing.

Householder, there are these four kinds of rebirth in a future
life.[2296](endnotes.xhtml_note-2296){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2296
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? Take someone who meditates
focused on pervading 'limited radiance'. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of limited
radiance.[2297](endnotes.xhtml_note-2297){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2297
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Next, take someone who meditates focused on
pervading 'limitless radiance'. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of the gods of limitless radiance. Next,
take someone who meditates focused on pervading 'corrupted
radiance'.[2298](endnotes.xhtml_note-2298){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2298
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of the gods of corrupted radiance. Next,
take someone who meditates focused on pervading 'pure radiance'. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the
gods of pure radiance. These are the four kinds of rebirth in a future
life.

There comes a time, householder, when the deities gather together as
one. When they do so, a difference in their color is evident, but not in
their radiance. It's like when a person brings several oil lamps into
one house. You can detect a difference in their flames, but not in their
radiance. In the same way, when the deities gather together as one, a
difference in their color is evident, but not in their radiance.

There comes a time when those deities go their separate ways. When they
do so, a difference both in their color and also in their radiance is
evident. It's like when a person takes those several oil lamps out of
that house. You can detect a difference both in their flames and also in
their radiance. In the same way, when the deities go their separate
ways, a difference both in their color and also in their radiance is
evident.

It's not that those deities think, 'What we have is permanent, lasting,
and eternal.' Rather, wherever those deities cling, that's where they
take pleasure. It's like when flies are being carried along on a
carrying-pole or basket. It's not that they think, 'What we have is
permanent, lasting, and eternal.' Rather, wherever those flies cling,
that's where they take pleasure. In the same way, it's not that those
deities think, 'What we have is permanent, lasting, and eternal.'
Rather, wherever those deities cling, that's where they take
pleasure."[2299](endnotes.xhtml_note-2299){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2299
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When he had spoken, Venerable Sabhiya Kaccāna said to Venerable
Anuruddha:[2300](endnotes.xhtml_note-2300){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2300
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, Honorable Anuruddha! I have a further question about this. Do all
the radiant deities have limited radiance, or do some there have
limitless radiance?"

"In that respect, Reverend Kaccāna, some deities there have limited
radiance, while some have limitless
radiance."[2301](endnotes.xhtml_note-2301){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2301
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What is the cause, Honorable Anuruddha, what is the reason why, when
those deities have been reborn in a single order of gods, some deities
there have limited radiance, while some have limitless radiance?"

"Well then, Reverend Kaccāna, I'll ask you about this in return, and you
can answer as you like. What do you think, Reverend Kaccāna? Which of
these two kinds of mental development is more expansive: when a
mendicant meditates focused on pervading as expansive the extent of a
single tree root, or two or three tree roots?"

"When a mendicant meditates on two or three tree roots."

"What do you think, Reverend Kaccāna? Which of these two kinds of mental
development is more expansive: when a mendicant meditates focused on
pervading as expansive the extent of two or three tree roots, or a
single village district ... two or three village districts ... a single
kingdom ... two or three kingdoms ... this land surrounded by ocean?"

"When a mendicant meditates on this land surrounded by ocean."

"This is the cause, Reverend Kaccāna, this is the reason why, when those
deities have been reborn in a single order of gods, some deities there
have limited radiance, while some have limitless radiance."

"Good, Honorable Anuruddha! I have a further question about this. Do all
the radiant deities have corrupted radiance, or do some there have pure
radiance?"

"In that respect, Reverend Kaccāna, some deities there have corrupted
radiance, while some have pure radiance."

"What is the cause, Venerable Anuruddha, what is the reason why, when
those deities have been reborn in a single order of gods, some deities
there have corrupted radiance, while some have pure radiance?"

"Well then, Reverend Kaccāna, I shall give you a simile. For by means of
a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose an oil lamp was burning with impure oil and impure wick. Because
of the impurity of the oil and the wick it burns dimly, as it were.

In the same way, take some mendicant who meditates focused on pervading
'corrupted radiance'. Their physical discomfort is not completely
settled, their dullness and drowsiness is not completely eradicated, and
their restlessness and remorse are not completely eliminated. Because of
this they practice absorption dimly, as it were. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of corrupted
radiance.

Suppose an oil lamp was burning with pure oil and pure wick. Because of
the purity of the oil and the wick it doesn't burn dimly, as it were.

In the same way, take some mendicant who meditates focused on pervading
'pure radiance'. Their physical discomfort is completely settled, their
dullness and drowsiness is completely eradicated, and their restlessness
and remorse is completely eliminated. Because of this they don't
practice absorption dimly, as it were. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of pure radiance.

"This is the cause, Reverend Kaccāna, this is the reason why, when those
deities have been reborn in a single order of gods, some deities there
have corrupted radiance, while some have pure radiance."

When he had spoken, Venerable Sabhiya Kaccāna said to Venerable
Anuruddha, "Good, Honorable Anuruddha!

Venerable Anuruddha, you don't say, 'So I have heard' or 'It ought to be
like
this.'[2302](endnotes.xhtml_note-2302){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2302
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, you say: 'These deities are like
this, those deities are like that.' Sir, it occurs to me, 'Clearly,
Venerable Anuruddha has previously lived together with those deities,
conversed, and engaged in discussion.'"

"Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, Reverend
Kaccāna.[2303](endnotes.xhtml_note-2303){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2303
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Nevertheless, I will answer you. For a long
time I have previously lived together with those deities, conversed, and
engaged in discussion."

When he had spoken, Venerable Sabhiya Kaccāna said to Pañcakaṅga the
chamberlain, "You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, to have
given up your state of uncertainty, and to have got the chance to listen
to this exposition of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="mn128">

### [MN 128]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Corruptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upakkilesasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2304](endnotes.xhtml_note-2304){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2304
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time the mendicants of Kosambī were arguing, quarreling, and
disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed
words.[2305](endnotes.xhtml_note-2305){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2305
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
told him what was happening, adding: "Please, sir go to those mendicants
out of sympathy." The Buddha consented with
silence.[2306](endnotes.xhtml_note-2306){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2306
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha went up to those mendicants and said, "Enough,
mendicants! Stop arguing, quarreling, and disputing."

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Wait, sir!
Let the Buddha, the Lord of the Dhamma, remain passive, dwelling in
blissful meditation in the present life. We will be known for this
arguing, quarreling, and disputing."

For a second time ... and a third time the Buddha said to those
mendicants, "Enough, mendicants! Stop arguing, quarreling, and
disputing."

For a third time that mendicant said to the Buddha, "Wait, sir! Let the
Buddha, the Lord of the Dhamma, remain passive, dwelling in blissful
meditation in the present life. We will be known for this arguing,
quarreling, and disputing."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kosambī for alms. After the meal, on his return from almsround,
he set his lodgings in order. Taking his bowl and robe, he recited these
verses while standing right there:

> "Many voices shout at
> once,[2307](endnotes.xhtml_note-2307){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2307
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> yet no-one thinks that they're the fool.\
> Even as the Saṅgha splits,\
> they think no better of the other.
>
> Dolts pretending to be astute,\
> they talk, their words out of
> bounds.[2308](endnotes.xhtml_note-2308){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2308
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> They blab at will, their mouths agape,\
> and not one knows what leads them on.
>
> 'They abused me, they hit
> me\![2309](endnotes.xhtml_note-2309){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2309
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> They beat me, they robbed me!'\
> For those bearing such a grudge,\
> hatred is never laid to rest.
>
> 'They abused me, they hit me!\
> They beat me, they robbed me!'\
> For those who bear no such grudge,\
> hatred is laid to rest.
>
> For never is hatred\
> laid to rest by hate,\
> it's laid to rest by love:\
> this is an ancient teaching.
>
> When others do not
> understand,[2310](endnotes.xhtml_note-2310){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2310
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> let us, who do understand
> this,[2311](endnotes.xhtml_note-2311){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2311
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> restrain ourselves in this regard;\
> for that is how conflicts are laid to rest.
>
> Breakers of bones and takers of life,\
> thieves of cattle, horses, wealth,\
> those who plunder the nation:\
> even they can come together,\
> so why can't you?
>
> If you find an alert companion,\
> a wise friend to live happily together,\
> then, overcoming all adversities,\
> wander with them, joyful and mindful.
>
> If you find no alert companion,\
> no wise friend to live happily together,\
> then, like a king who flees his conquered realm,\
> wander alone like a tusker in the wilds.
>
> It's better to wander alone,\
> there's no fellowship with fools.\
> Wander alone and do no wrong,\
> at ease like a tusker in the wilds."

After speaking these verses while standing, the Buddha went to the
village of the child
salt-miners,[2312](endnotes.xhtml_note-2312){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2312
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} where Venerable Bhagu was staying at the
time.[2313](endnotes.xhtml_note-2313){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2313
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Bhagu saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance, so he spread out a seat and placed water for washing the feet.
The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, and washed his feet. Bhagu bowed
to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "I hope you're keeping well, mendicant; I hope
you're all right. And I hope you're having no trouble getting almsfood."

"I'm keeping well, Blessed One; I'm all right. And I'm having no trouble
getting almsfood."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Bhagu with
a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and set out for the
Eastern Bamboo Park.

Now at that time the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila were
staying in the Eastern Bamboo
Park.[2314](endnotes.xhtml_note-2314){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2314
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The park keeper saw the Buddha coming off
in the distance and said to the Buddha, "Don't come into this park,
ascetic.[2315](endnotes.xhtml_note-2315){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2315
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are three gentlemen staying here
whose nature is to desire only the self. Don't disturb them."

Anuruddha heard the park keeper conversing with the Buddha, and said to
him, "Don't keep the Buddha out, good park keeper! Our Teacher, the
Blessed One, has arrived."

Then Anuruddha went to Nandiya and Kimbila, and said to them, "Come
forth, venerables, come forth! Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has
arrived!"

Then Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila came out to greet the Buddha. One
received his bowl and robe, one spread out a seat, and one set out water
for washing his feet. The Buddha sat on the seat spread out and washed
his feet. Those venerables bowed and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to Anuruddha, "I hope you're keeping well, Anuruddha and
friends; I hope you're all right. And I hope you're having no trouble
getting almsfood."

"We're keeping well, Blessed One; we're all right. And we're having no
trouble getting almsfood."

"I hope you're living in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly eyes?"

"Indeed, sir, we live in harmony as you say."

"But how do you live this way?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'I'm fortunate, so very fortunate, to live
together with spiritual companions such as these.' I consistently treat
these venerables with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in
public and in private. I think: 'Why don't I set aside my own ideas and
just go along with these venerables' ideas?' And that's what I do.
Though we're different in body, sir, we're one in mind, it seems to me."

And the venerables Nandiya and Kimbila spoke likewise, and they added:
"That's how we live in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly eyes."

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! But I hope you're living diligently,
keen, and resolute?"

"Indeed, sir, we live diligently."

"But how do you live this way?"

"In this case, sir, whoever returns first from almsround prepares the
seats, and puts out the drinking water and the rubbish bin. If there's
anything left over, whoever returns last eats it if they like. Otherwise
they throw it out where there is little that grows, or drop it into
water that has no living creatures. Then they put away the seats,
drinking water, and rubbish bin, and sweep the refectory. If someone
sees that the pot of water for washing, drinking, or the toilet is empty
they set it up. If he can't do it, he summons another with a wave of the
hand, and they set it up by lending each other a hand to lift. But we
don't break into speech for that
reason.[2316](endnotes.xhtml_note-2316){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2316
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And every five days we sit together for the
whole night and discuss the teachings. That's how we live diligently,
keen, and resolute."

"Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! But as you live diligently like
this, have you achieved any superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable
meditation?"[2317](endnotes.xhtml_note-2317){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2317
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well, sir, while meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, we perceive
both light and vision of
forms.[2318](endnotes.xhtml_note-2318){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2318
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But before long the light and the vision of
forms vanish. We haven't worked out the basis of
that."[2319](endnotes.xhtml_note-2319){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2319
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Well, you should work out the basis of that. Before my awakening---when
I was still unawakened but intent on awakening---I too perceived light
and vision of forms. But before long my light and vision of forms
vanished.[2320](endnotes.xhtml_note-2320){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2320
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It occurred to me: 'What's the cause,
what's the reason why my light and vision of forms vanish?' It occurred
to me: 'Doubt arose in me, and because of that my immersion fell
away.[2321](endnotes.xhtml_note-2321){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2321
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. I'll make sure that doubt will not arise in me
again.'

While meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived light and
vision of forms. But before long my light and vision of forms vanished.
It occurred to me: 'What's the cause, what's the reason why my light and
vision of forms vanish?' It occurred to me: 'Loss of focus arose in me,
and because of that my immersion fell
away.[2322](endnotes.xhtml_note-2322){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2322
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss of
focus will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Dullness and drowsiness arose in me
...[2323](endnotes.xhtml_note-2323){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2323
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss
of focus nor dullness and drowsiness will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Terror arose in me, and because of that my
immersion fell away. When immersion falls away, the light and vision of
forms vanish. Suppose a person was traveling along a road, and killers
were to spring out at them from both sides. They'd feel terrified
because of
that.[2324](endnotes.xhtml_note-2324){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2324
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, terror arose in me ...
I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss of focus nor dullness and
drowsiness nor terror will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Elation arose in me, and because of that my
immersion fell
away.[2325](endnotes.xhtml_note-2325){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2325
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. Suppose a person was looking for an entrance to
a hidden treasure. And all at once they'd come across five entrances!
They'd feel excited because of
that.[2326](endnotes.xhtml_note-2326){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2326
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, elation arose in me ...
I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss of focus nor dullness and
drowsiness nor terror nor elation will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Discomfort arose in me
...[2327](endnotes.xhtml_note-2327){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2327
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss
of focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor elation nor
discomfort will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Excessive energy arose in me, and because of that
my immersion fell
away.[2328](endnotes.xhtml_note-2328){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2328
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. Suppose a person was to grip a quail too tightly
in their hands---it would die right there. I'll make sure that neither
doubt nor loss of focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor
elation nor discomfort nor excessive energy will arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Overly lax energy arose in me, and because of that
my immersion fell
away.[2329](endnotes.xhtml_note-2329){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2329
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. Suppose a person was to grip a quail too
loosely---it would fly out of their hands. I'll make sure that neither
doubt nor loss of focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor
elation nor discomfort nor excessive energy nor overly lax energy will
arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Longing arose in me
...[2330](endnotes.xhtml_note-2330){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2330
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss
of focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor elation nor
discomfort nor excessive energy nor overly lax energy nor longing will
arise in me again.'

While meditating ... 'Perceptions of diversity arose in me
...[2331](endnotes.xhtml_note-2331){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2331
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss
of focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor elation nor
discomfort nor excessive energy nor overly lax energy nor longing nor
perception of diversity will arise in me again.'

While meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived light and
vision of forms. But before long my light and vision of forms vanished.
It occurred to me: 'What's the cause, what's the reason why my light and
vision of forms vanish?' It occurred to me: 'Excessive concentration on
forms arose in me, and because of that my immersion fell
away.[2332](endnotes.xhtml_note-2332){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2332
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When immersion falls away, the light and
vision of forms vanish. I'll make sure that neither doubt nor loss of
focus nor dullness and drowsiness nor terror nor elation nor discomfort
nor excessive energy nor overly lax energy nor longing nor perception of
diversity nor excessive concentration on forms will arise in me again.'

When I understood that doubt is a corruption of the mind, I gave it up.
When I understood that loss of focus, dullness and drowsiness, terror,
elation, discomfort, excessive energy, overly lax energy, longing,
perception of diversity, and excessive concentration on forms are
corruptions of the mind, I gave them up.

While meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived light but did
not see forms, or I saw forms, but did not see light. And this went on
for a whole night, a whole day, even a whole night and day. I thought:
'What is the cause, what is the reason for this?' It occurred to me:
'When I don't focus on the basis of the forms, but focus on the basis of
the light, then I perceive light and do not see
forms.[2333](endnotes.xhtml_note-2333){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2333
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But when I don't focus on the basis of the
light, but focus on the basis of the forms, then I see forms and do not
perceive light. And this goes on for a whole night, a whole day, even a
whole night and day.'

While meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived limited light
and saw limited forms, or I perceived limitless light and saw limitless
forms. And this went on for a whole night, a whole day, even a whole
night and day. I thought: 'What is the cause, what is the reason for
this?' It occurred to me: 'When my immersion is limited, then my vision
is limited, and with limited vision I perceive limited light and see
limited forms. But when my immersion is limitless, then my vision is
limitless, and with limitless vision I perceive limitless light and see
limitless forms. And this goes on for a whole night, a whole day, even a
whole night and day.'

After understanding that doubt, loss of focus, dullness and drowsiness,
terror, excitement, discomfort, excessive energy, overly lax energy,
longing, perception of diversity, and excessive concentration on forms
are corruptions of the mind, I had given them up.

I thought: 'I've given up my mental corruptions. Now let me develop
immersion in three ways.' I developed immersion while placing the mind
and keeping it connected; without placing the mind, merely keeping it
connected; without placing the mind or keeping it connected; with
rapture; without rapture; with pleasure; with
equanimity.[2334](endnotes.xhtml_note-2334){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2334
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

When I had developed immersion in these ways, the knowledge and vision
arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now
there are no more future lives.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Anuruddha approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn129">

### [MN 129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Foolish and the Astute ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bālapaṇḍitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2335](endnotes.xhtml_note-2335){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2335
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"These are the three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a
fool.[2336](endnotes.xhtml_note-2336){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2336
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What three? A fool thinks poorly, speaks
poorly, and acts poorly. If a fool didn't think poorly, speak poorly,
and act poorly, then how would the astute know of them, 'This fellow is
a fool, an untrue person'? But since a fool does think poorly, speak
poorly, and act poorly, then the astute do know of them, 'This fellow is
a fool, an untrue person'.

A fool experiences three kinds of suffering and sadness in the present
life.

Suppose a fool is sitting in a council hall, a street, or a crossroad,
where people are discussing what is proper and fitting. And suppose that
fool is someone who kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual
misconduct, lies, and uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Then
that fool thinks, 'These people are discussing what is proper and
fitting. But those bad things are found in me and I exhibit them!' This
is the first kind of suffering and sadness that a fool experiences in
the present life.

Furthermore, a fool sees that the kings have arrested a bandit, a
criminal, and subjected them to various punishments---whipping, caning,
and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet, or both; cutting off ears or
nose, or both; the 'porridge pot', the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's
mouth', the 'garland of fire', the 'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist',
the 'bark dress', the 'antelope', the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the
'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar', the 'straw mat'; being splashed
with hot oil, being fed to the dogs, being impaled alive, and being
beheaded.[2337](endnotes.xhtml_note-2337){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2337
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then that fool thinks, 'The kinds of deeds
for which the kings inflict such punishments---those things are found in
me and I exhibit them! If the kings find out about me, they will inflict
the same kinds of punishments on me!' This is the second kind of
suffering and sadness that a fool experiences in the present life.

Furthermore, when a fool is resting on a chair or a bed or on the
ground, their past bad deeds---misconduct of body, speech, and
mind---settle down upon them, rest down upon them, and lay down upon
them. It is like the shadow of a great mountain peak in the evening as
it settles down, rests down, and lays down upon the earth. In the same
way, when a fool is resting on a chair or a bed or on the ground, their
past bad deeds---misconduct of body, speech, and mind---settle down upon
them, rest down upon them, and lay down upon them. Then that fool
thinks, 'Alas, I haven't done good and skillful things that keep me
safe. And I have done bad, violent, and depraved things. When I depart,
I'll go to the place where people who've done such things go.' They
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breasts and falling into
confusion. This is the third kind of suffering and sadness that a fool
experiences in the present life.

Having done bad things by way of body, speech, and mind, when their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell.

And if there's anything of which it may be rightly said that it is
utterly unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable, it is of hell that
this should be
said.[2338](endnotes.xhtml_note-2338){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2338
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So much so that it's not easy to give a
simile for how painful hell is."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But sir, is
it possible to give a simile?"

"It's possible," said the Buddha.

"Suppose they arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the king,
saying,[2339](endnotes.xhtml_note-2339){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2339
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a
criminal. Punish him as you will.' The king would say, 'Go, my men, and
strike this man in the morning with a hundred spears!' The king's men
did as they were told. Then at midday the king would say, 'My men, how
is that man?' 'He's still alive, Your Majesty.' The king would say, 'Go,
my men, and strike this man in the midday with a hundred spears!' The
king's men did as they were told. Then late in the afternoon the king
would say, 'My men, how is that man?' 'He's still alive, Your Majesty.'
The king would say, 'Go, my men, and strike this man in the late
afternoon with a hundred spears!' The king's men did as they were told.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that man experience pain and
distress from being struck with three hundred spears?"

"Sir, that man would experience pain and distress from being struck with
one spear, let alone three hundred spears!"

Then the Buddha, picking up a stone the size of his palm, addressed the
mendicants,[2340](endnotes.xhtml_note-2340){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2340
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "What do you think, mendicants? Which is
bigger: the stone the size of my palm that I've picked up, or the
Himalayas, the king of mountains?"

"Sir, the stone you've picked up is tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, it
doesn't count, it's not worth a fraction, there's no comparison."

"In the same way, compared to the suffering in hell, the pain and
distress experienced by that man due to being struck with three hundred
spears doesn't count, it's not worth a fraction, there's no comparison.

The wardens of hell punish them with the five-fold
crucifixion.[2341](endnotes.xhtml_note-2341){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2341
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drive red-hot stakes through the hands
and feet, and another in the middle of the chest. And there they feel
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that
bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell throw them down and hack them with axes. ...

They hang them upside-down and hack them with hatchets. ...

They harness them to a chariot, and drive them back and forth across
burning ground, blazing and glowing. ...

They make them climb up and down a huge mountain of burning coals,
blazing and glowing. ...

The wardens of hell turn them upside down and throw them into a red-hot
copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing. There they're seared in
boiling scum, and they're swept up and down and round and round. And
there they feel painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't
die until that bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell toss them in the Great
Hell.[2342](endnotes.xhtml_note-2342){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2342
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, about that Great
Hell:[2343](endnotes.xhtml_note-2343){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2343
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> 'Four are its corners, four its doors,\
> neatly divided in equal parts.\
> Surrounded by an iron wall,\
> of iron is its roof.
>
> The ground is even made of iron,\
> it burns with fierce fire.\
> The heat forever radiates\
> a hundred leagues around.'

I could tell you many different things about
hell.[2344](endnotes.xhtml_note-2344){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2344
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So much so that it's not easy to completely
describe the suffering in hell.

There are, mendicants, animals that feed on grass. They eat by cropping
fresh or dried grass with their teeth. And what animals feed on grass?
Elephants, horses, cattle, donkeys, goats, deer, and various others. A
fool who used to be a glutton here and did bad deeds here, when their
body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of those sentient
beings who feed on grass.

There are animals that feed on dung. When they catch a whiff of dung
they run to it, thinking, 'There we'll eat! There we'll eat!' It's like
when brahmins smell a burnt offering, they run to it, thinking, 'There
we'll eat! There we'll
eat!'[2345](endnotes.xhtml_note-2345){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2345
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, there are animals that
feed on dung. When they catch a whiff of dung they run to it, thinking,
'There we'll eat! There we'll eat!' And what animals feed on dung?
Chickens, pigs, dogs, jackals, and various others. A fool who used to be
a glutton here and did bad deeds here, after death is reborn in the
company of those sentient beings who feed on dung.

There are animals who are born, live, and die in darkness. And what
animals are born, live, and die in darkness? Moths, maggots, earthworms,
and various others. A fool who used to be a glutton here and did bad
deeds here, after death is reborn in the company of those sentient
beings who are born, live, and die in darkness.

There are animals who are born, live, and die in water. And what animals
are born, live, and die in water? Fish, turtles, crocodiles, and various
others. A fool who used to be a glutton here and did bad deeds here,
after death is reborn in the company of those sentient beings who are
born, live, and die in water.

There are animals who are born, live, and die in filth. And what animals
are born, live, and die in filth? Those animals that are born, live, and
die in a rotten fish, a rotten carcass, rotten porridge, or a sewer. A
fool who used to be a glutton here and did bad deeds here, after death
is reborn in the company of those sentient beings who are born, live,
and die in filth.

I could tell you many different things about the animal realm. So much
so that it's not easy to completely describe the suffering in the animal
realm.

Mendicants, suppose a person were to throw a yoke with a single hole
into the
ocean.[2346](endnotes.xhtml_note-2346){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2346
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The east wind wafts it west; the west wind
wafts it east; the north wind wafts it south; and the south wind wafts
it north. And there was a one-eyed turtle who popped up once every
hundred years.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that one-eyed turtle still poke its
neck through the hole in that yoke?"

"No, sir. Only after a very long time, sir, if ever."

"That one-eyed turtle would poke its neck through the hole in that yoke
sooner than a fool who has fallen to the underworld would be reborn as a
human being, I say. Why is that? Because in that place there's no
principled or moral conduct, and no doing what is good and skillful.
There they just prey on each other, preying on the weak.

And suppose that fool, after a very long time, returned to the human
realm. They'd be reborn in a low class family---a family of
corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or scavengers.
Such families are poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is
tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. And they'd be ugly,
unsightly, deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or
half-paralyzed. They don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting.
And they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell.

Suppose a gambler were to lose his wife and child, all his property, and
then get thrown in jail with his first losing hand. Such a losing hand
is trivial compared to the losing hand whereby a fool, having done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. This is the total fulfillment of the fool's level.

There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an
astute
person.[2347](endnotes.xhtml_note-2347){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2347
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What three? An astute person thinks well,
speaks well, and acts well. If an astute person didn't think well, speak
well, and act well, then how would the astute know of them, 'This fellow
is astute, a true person'?

But since an astute person does think well, speak well, and act well,
then the astute do know of them, 'This fellow is astute, a true person'.
An astute person experiences three kinds of pleasure and happiness in
the present life. Suppose an astute person is sitting in a council hall,
a street, or a crossroad, where people are discussing about what is
proper and fitting. And suppose that astute person is someone who
refrains from killing living creatures, stealing, committing sexual
misconduct, lying, and alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Then that
astute person thinks, 'These people are discussing what is proper and
fitting. And those good things are found in me and I exhibit them.' This
is the first kind of pleasure and happiness that an astute person
experiences in the present life.

Furthermore, an astute person sees that the kings have arrested a
bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to various
punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet,
or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot', the
'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the 'burning
hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope', the 'meat
hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar', the 'straw
mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs, being impaled
alive, and being beheaded. Then that astute person thinks, 'The kinds of
deeds for which the kings inflict such punishments---those things are
not found in me and I do not exhibit them!' This is the second kind of
pleasure and happiness that an astute person experiences in the present
life.

Furthermore, when an astute person is resting on a chair or a bed or on
the ground, their past good deeds---good conduct of body, speech, and
mind---settle down upon them, rest down upon them, and lay down upon
them. It is like the shadow of a great mountain peak in the evening as
it settles down, rests down, and lays down upon the earth. In the same
way, when an astute person is resting on a chair or a bed or on the
ground, their past good deeds---good conduct of body, speech, and
mind---settle down upon them, rest down upon them, and lay down upon
them. Then that astute person thinks, 'Well, I haven't done bad,
violent, and depraved things. And I have done good and skillful deeds
that keep me safe. When I pass away, I'll go to the place where people
who've done such things go.' So they don't sorrow and wail and lament,
beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is the third kind
of pleasure and happiness that an astute person experiences in the
present life.

When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.

And if there's anything of which it may be rightly said that it is
utterly likable, desirable, and agreeable, it is of heaven that this
should be said. So much so that it's not easy to give a simile for how
pleasurable heaven is."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But sir, is
it possible to give a simile?"

"It's possible," said the Buddha.

"Suppose there was a king, a wheel-turning monarch who possessed seven
treasures and four blessings, and experienced pleasure and happiness
because of them.

What seven? It's when, on the fifteenth day sabbath, an anointed
aristocratic king has bathed his head and gone upstairs in the royal
longhouse to observe the sabbath. And the heavenly wheel-treasure
appears to him, with a thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in
every
detail.[2348](endnotes.xhtml_note-2348){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2348
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing this, the king thinks, 'I have heard
that when the heavenly wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he
becomes a wheel-turning monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?'

Then the anointed aristocratic king, taking a ceremonial vase in his
left hand, besprinkled the wheel-treasure with his right hand,
saying,[2349](endnotes.xhtml_note-2349){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2349
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Roll forth, O wheel-treasure! Triumph, O
wheel-treasure!' Then the wheel-treasure rolls towards the east. And the
king follows it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever
place the wheel-treasure stands still, there the king comes to stay
together with his
army.[2350](endnotes.xhtml_note-2350){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2350
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And any opposing rulers of the eastern
quarter come to the wheel-turning monarch and say, 'Come, great king!
Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.' The
wheel-turning monarch says, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal.
Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink alcohol.
Maintain the current level of
taxation.'[2351](endnotes.xhtml_note-2351){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2351
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so the opposing rulers of the eastern
quarter become his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolls towards the south.
...[2352](endnotes.xhtml_note-2352){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2352
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Having plunged into the southern ocean and
emerged again, it rolls towards the west. ... Having plunged into the
western ocean and emerged again, it rolls towards the north, followed by
the king together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stands still, there the king comes to stay together with
his army.

And any opposing rulers of the northern quarter come to the
wheel-turning monarch and say, 'Come, great king! Welcome, great king!
We are yours, great king, instruct us.' The wheel-turning monarch says,
'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual
misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink alcohol. Maintain the current level
of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the eastern quarter become
his
vassals.[2353](endnotes.xhtml_note-2353){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2353
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returns to the royal capital. There it stands still at the
gate to the royal compound as if fixed to an axle, illuminating the
royal
compound.[2354](endnotes.xhtml_note-2354){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2354
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is the wheel-treasure that appears to
the wheel-turning monarch.

Next, the elephant-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. It was
an all-white sky-walker with psychic power, touching the ground in seven
places, a king of elephants named
Sabbath.[2355](endnotes.xhtml_note-2355){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2355
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing him, the king was impressed, 'This
would truly be a fine elephant vehicle, if he would submit to taming.'
Then the elephant-treasure submitted to taming, as if he were a fine
thoroughbred elephant that had been tamed for a long time. Once it so
happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same
elephant-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land
surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for
breakfast. Such is the elephant-treasure that appears to the
wheel-turning monarch.

Next, the horse-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. It was an
all-white sky-walker with psychic power, with head of black and mane
like woven reeds, a royal steed named
Thundercloud.[2356](endnotes.xhtml_note-2356){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2356
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Seeing him, the king was impressed, 'This
would truly be a fine horse vehicle, if he would submit to taming.' Then
the horse-treasure submitted to taming, as if he were a fine
thoroughbred horse that had been tamed for a long time. Once it so
happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same
horse-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land
surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for
breakfast. Such is the horse-treasure that appears to the wheel-turning
monarch.

Next, the jewel-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. It is a
beryl gem that's naturally beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked. And
the radiance of that jewel spreads all-round for a league. Once it so
happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same
jewel-treasure, mobilized his army of four divisions and, with the jewel
hoisted on his banner, set out in the dark of the night. Then the
villagers around them set off to work, thinking that it was day. Such is
the jewel-treasure that appears to the wheel-turning monarch.

Next, the woman-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. She is
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. She's neither
too tall nor too short; neither too thin nor too fat; neither too dark
nor too light. She outdoes human beauty without reaching heavenly
beauty. And her touch is like a tuft of cotton-wool or kapok. When it's
cool her limbs are warm, and when it's warm her limbs are cool. The
fragrance of sandal floats from her body, and lotus from her mouth. She
gets up before the king and goes to bed after him, and is obliging,
behaving nicely and speaking politely. The woman-treasure does not
betray the wheel-turning monarch even in thought, still less in deed.
Such is the woman-treasure who appears to the wheel-turning monarch.

Next, the householder-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. The
power of clairvoyance manifests in him as a result of past deeds, by
which he sees hidden treasure, both owned and ownerless. He approaches
the wheel-turning monarch and says, 'Relax, sire. I will take care of
the treasury.' Once it so happened that the wheel-turning monarch,
testing that same householder-treasure, boarded a boat and sailed to the
middle of the Ganges river. Then he said to the householder-treasure,
'Householder, I need gold, both coined and uncoined.' 'Well then, great
king, draw the boat up to one shore.' 'It's right here, householder,
that I need gold, both coined and uncoined.' Then that
householder-treasure, immersing both hands in the water, pulled up a pot
full of gold, both coined and uncoined, and said to the king, 'Is this
sufficient, great king? Has enough been done, great king, enough
offered?' The wheel-turning monarch said, 'That is sufficient,
householder. Enough has been done, enough offered.' Such is the
householder-treasure that appears to the wheel-turning monarch.

Next, the counselor-treasure appears to the wheel-turning monarch. He is
astute, competent, intelligent, and capable of getting the king to
appoint who should be appointed, dismiss who should be dismissed, and
retain who should be retained. He approaches the wheel-turning monarch
and says, 'Relax, sire. I shall issue instructions.' Such is the
counselor-treasure that appears to the wheel-turning monarch. These are
the seven treasures possessed by a wheel-turning monarch.

And what are the four
blessings?[2357](endnotes.xhtml_note-2357){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2357
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

A wheel-turning monarch is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of
surpassing beauty, more so than other people. This is the first
blessing.

Furthermore, he is long-lived, more so than other people. This is the
second blessing.

Furthermore, he is rarely ill or unwell, and his stomach digests well,
being neither too hot nor too cold, more so than other people. This is
the third blessing.

Furthermore, a wheel-turning monarch is as dear and beloved to the
brahmins and
householders[2358](endnotes.xhtml_note-2358){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2358
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} as a father is to his children. And the
brahmins and householders are as dear to the wheel-turning monarch as
children are to their father.

Once it so happened that a wheel-turning monarch went with his army of
four divisions to visit a park. Then the brahmins and householders went
up to him and said, 'Slow down, Your Majesty, so we may see you longer!'
And the king addressed his charioteer, 'Drive slowly, charioteer, so I
can see the brahmins and householders longer!' This is the fourth
blessing.

These are the four blessings possessed by a wheel-turning monarch.

What do you think, mendicants? Would a wheel-turning monarch who
possessed these seven treasures and these four blessings experience
pleasure and happiness because of them?"

"Sir, a wheel-turning monarch who possessed even a single one of these
treasures would experience pleasure and happiness because of that, let
alone all seven treasures and four blessings!"

Then the Buddha, picking up a stone the size of his palm, addressed the
mendicants, "What do you think, mendicants? Which is bigger: the stone
the size of my palm that I've picked up, or the Himalayas, the king of
mountains?"

"Sir, the stone you've picked up is tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, it
doesn't count, it's not worth a fraction, there's no comparison."

"In the same way, compared to the happiness of heaven, the pleasure and
happiness experienced by a wheel-turning monarch due to those seven
treasures and those four blessings doesn't even count, it's not even a
fraction, there's no comparison.

And suppose that astute person, after a very long time, returned to the
human realm. They'd be reborn in a well-to-do family of aristocrats,
brahmins, or householders---rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of
gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and
grain. And they'd be attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. They'd get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; and a bed, house, and lighting. And they do good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

Suppose a gambler was to win a big pile of money with the first perfect
hand. Such a perfect hand is trivial compared to the perfect hand
whereby an astute person, when their body breaks up, after death, is
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the total fulfillment
of the astute person's level."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn130">

### [MN 130]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Messengers of the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadūtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2359](endnotes.xhtml_note-2359){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2359
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with
clear eyes standing in between them would see people entering and
leaving a house and wandering to and fro.

In the same way, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did good things by way of body, speech, and mind.
They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they
chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, or among
humans. These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they
chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the ghost realm, the animal realm, or in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.'

The wardens of hell take them by the arms and present them to King Yama,
saying,[2360](endnotes.xhtml_note-2360){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2360
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Your Majesty, this person did not pay due
respect to their mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, or honor the
elders in the family. May Your Majesty punish them!'

King Yama pursues, presses, and grills them about the first messenger of
the gods. 'Mister, did you not see the first messenger of the gods that
appeared among human
beings?'[2361](endnotes.xhtml_note-2361){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2361
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

He says, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings a
little baby collapsed in their own urine and feces?'

He says, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to be born. I'm not exempt from
rebirth. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

He says, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by ascetics and brahmins, or by the
deities. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the second messenger of the gods.
'Mister, did you not see the second messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

He says, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings an
elderly woman or a man---eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old---bent
double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing,
past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin
wrinkled, and limbs blotchy?'

He says, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to grow old. I'm not exempt
from old age. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

He says, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by ascetics and brahmins, or by the
deities. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the third messenger of the gods.
'Mister, did you not see the third messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

He says, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings a
woman or a man, sick, suffering, gravely ill, collapsed in their own
urine and feces, being picked up by some and put down by others?'

He says, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to become sick. I'm not exempt
from sickness. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?' He
says, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by ascetics and brahmins, or by the
deities. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the fourth messenger of the gods.
'Mister, did you not see the fourth messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

He says, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings when
the rulers arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to various
punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet,
or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot', the
'shell-shave', the 'demon's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the 'burning
hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope', the 'meat
hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar', the 'straw
mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs, being impaled
alive, and being beheaded?'

He says, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---that if someone who does bad deeds receives such
punishment in the present life, what must happen to them in the next;
I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

He says, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by ascetics and brahmins, or by the
deities. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the fifth messenger of the gods.
'Mister, did you not see the fifth messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

He says, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings a
woman or a man, dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and
festering?'

He says, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to die. I'm not exempt from
death. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

He says, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by ascetics and brahmins, or by the
deities. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

After grilling them about the fifth messenger of the gods, King Yama
falls silent.

The wardens of hell punish them with the five-fold
crucifixion.[2362](endnotes.xhtml_note-2362){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2362
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They drive red-hot stakes through the hands
and feet, and another in the middle of the chest. And there they suffer
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that
bad deed is
eliminated.[2363](endnotes.xhtml_note-2363){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2363
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The wardens of hell throw them down and hack them with axes.
...[2364](endnotes.xhtml_note-2364){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2364
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They hang them upside-down and hack them with hatchets.
...[2365](endnotes.xhtml_note-2365){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2365
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They harness them to a chariot, and drive them back and forth across
burning ground, blazing and glowing. ...

They make them climb up and down a huge mountain of burning coals,
blazing and glowing. ...

The wardens of hell turn them upside down and throw them in a red-hot
copper pot, burning, blazing, and
glowing.[2366](endnotes.xhtml_note-2366){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2366
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There they're seared in boiling scum, and
they're swept up and down and round and round. And there they suffer
painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that
bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell toss them into the Great Hell. Now, about that Great
Hell:

> 'Four are its corners, four its doors,\
> neatly divided in equal parts.\
> Surrounded by an iron wall,\
> of iron is its roof.
>
> The ground is even made of iron,\
> it burns with fierce
> fire.[2367](endnotes.xhtml_note-2367){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2367
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The heat forever radiates\
> a hundred leagues around.'

Now in the Great Hell, flames surge out of the walls and crash into the
opposite wall: from east to west, from west to east, from north to
south, from south to north, from bottom to top, from top to bottom. And
there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they
don't die until that bad deed is eliminated.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, the
eastern gate of the Great Hell is opened. So they run there as fast as
they
can.[2368](endnotes.xhtml_note-2368){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2368
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And as they run, their outer skin, inner
skin, flesh, and sinews burn and even their bones smoke. Such is their
escape;[2369](endnotes.xhtml_note-2369){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2369
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} but when they've managed to make it most of
the way, the gate is slammed shut. And there they suffer painful, sharp,
severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed is
eliminated.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, the
western gate ... northern gate ... southern gate of the Great Hell is
opened. So they run there as fast as they can. And as they run, their
outer skin, inner skin, flesh, and sinews burn and even their bones
smoke. Such is their escape; but when they've managed to make it most of
the way, the gate is slammed shut. And there they suffer painful, sharp,
severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed is
eliminated.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, the
eastern gate of the Great Hell is opened. So they run there as fast as
they can. And as they run, their outer skin, inner skin, flesh, and
sinews burn and even their bones smoke. Such is their escape; and they
make it out that door.

Immediately adjacent to the Great Hell is the vast Dung Hell. And that's
where they fall. In that Dung Hell there are needle-mouthed creatures
that bore through the outer skin, the inner skin, the flesh, sinews, and
bones, until they reach the marrow and devour
it.[2370](endnotes.xhtml_note-2370){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2370
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there they suffer painful, sharp,
severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed is
eliminated.

Immediately adjacent to the Dung Hell is the vast Hell of Burning
Chaff.[2371](endnotes.xhtml_note-2371){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2371
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's where they fall. And there they
suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until
that bad deed is eliminated.

Immediately adjacent to the Hell of Burning Chaff is the vast Red
Silk-Cotton Forest. It's a league high, full of sixteen-inch thorns,
burning, blazing, and
glowing.[2372](endnotes.xhtml_note-2372){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2372
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And there they make them climb up and down.
And there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they
don't die until that bad deed is eliminated.

Immediately adjacent to the Red Silk-Cotton Forest is the vast
Sword-Leaf
Forest.[2373](endnotes.xhtml_note-2373){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2373
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They enter that. There the fallen leaves
blown by the wind cut their hands, feet, both hands and feet; they cut
their ears, nose, both ears and nose. And there they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed
is eliminated.

Immediately adjacent to the Sword-Leaf Forest is the vast Acid
River.[2374](endnotes.xhtml_note-2374){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2374
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's where they fall. There they are
swept upstream, swept downstream, and swept both up and down stream. And
there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they
don't die until that bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell pull them out with a hook and place them on dry
land, and say, 'Mister, what do you
want?'[2375](endnotes.xhtml_note-2375){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2375
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

They say, 'I'm hungry, sir.'

The wardens of hell force open their mouth with a hot iron
spike---burning, blazing, glowing---and shove in a red-hot copper ball,
burning, blazing, and
glowing.[2376](endnotes.xhtml_note-2376){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2376
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It burns their lips, mouth, tongue, throat,
and stomach before coming out below dragging their entrails. And there
they feel painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die
until that bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell say, 'Mister, what do you want?'

They say, 'I'm thirsty, sir.'

The wardens of hell force open their mouth with a hot iron
spike---burning, blazing, glowing---and pour in molten copper, burning,
blazing, and
glowing.[2377](endnotes.xhtml_note-2377){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2377
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It burns their lips, mouth, tongue, throat,
and stomach before coming out below dragging their entrails. And there
they feel painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die
until that bad deed is eliminated.

The wardens of hell toss them back in the Great Hell.

Once upon a time, King Yama thought: 'Those who do such bad deeds in the
world receive these many different punishments. Oh, I hope I may be
reborn as a human being! And that a Realized One---a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha---arises in the world! And that I may pay homage
to the Buddha! Then the Buddha can teach me Dhamma, so that I may
understand his teaching.'

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself."[2378](endnotes.xhtml_note-2378){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2378
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Warned by the gods' messengers,\
> those people who are
> negligent[2379](endnotes.xhtml_note-2379){#mn-sunnatavagga.xhtml_noteref-2379
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> sorrow for a long time\
> when they go to that wretched place.
>
> Warned by the gods' messengers,\
> those peaceful true persons here,\
> do not neglect\
> the teaching of the Noble One.
>
> Seeing the danger in grasping,\
> the origin of birth and death,\
> the unattached are freed\
> with the ending of birth and death.
>
> Happy, they've come to a safe place,\
> quenched in this very life.\
> They've gone beyond all threats and perils,\
> and risen above all suffering."

</article>

[]{#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Analysis {#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_mn-vibhangavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn131">

### [MN 131]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Fine Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaddekarattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2380](endnotes.xhtml_note-2380){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2380
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"I shall teach you the summary recital and the analysis of the one who
has one fine night. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

> "Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the
> future.[2381](endnotes.xhtml_note-2381){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2381
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present
> phenomenon[2382](endnotes.xhtml_note-2382){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2382
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> you clearly discern in every
> case.[2383](endnotes.xhtml_note-2383){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2383
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> The unfaltering, the
> unshakable:[2384](endnotes.xhtml_note-2384){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2384
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful
> sage.[2385](endnotes.xhtml_note-2385){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2385
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how do you run back to the past? You muster delight there, thinking:
'I had such form in the past.' ... 'I had such feeling ... perception
... choice ... consciousness in the
past.'[2386](endnotes.xhtml_note-2386){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2386
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how you run back to the past.

And how do you not run back to the past? You don't muster delight there,
thinking: 'I had such form in the past.' ... 'I had such feeling ...
perception ... choice ... consciousness in the past.' That's how you
don't run back to the past.

And how do you anticipate the future? You muster delight there,
thinking: 'May I have such form in the future.' ... 'May I have such
feeling ... perception ... choice ... consciousness in the future.'
That's how you anticipate the future.

And how do you not anticipate the future? You don't muster delight
there, thinking: 'May I have such form in the future.' ... 'May I have
such feeling ... perception ... choice ... consciousness in the future.'
That's how you don't anticipate the future.

And how do you falter amid presently arisen
phenomena?[2387](endnotes.xhtml_note-2387){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2387
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when an unlearned ordinary person has
not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the
teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are
neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness as
self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness. That's how you falter amid presently arisen phenomena.

And how do you not falter amid presently arisen phenomena? It's when a
learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They don't regard feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness. That's how you don't falter amid
presently arisen phenomena.

> 'Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future.\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present phenomenon\
> you clearly discern in every case.\
> The unfaltering, the unshakable:\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.'

And that's what I meant when I said: 'I shall teach you the summary
recital and the analysis of the one who has one fine night.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn132">

### [MN 132]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ānanda and One Fine Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandabhaddekarattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Ānanda was educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk on
the topic of the summary recital and the analysis of the one who has one
fine night.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to the
assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants, "Who was inspiring the mendicants with a talk on the summary
recital and the analysis of the one who has one fine night?"

"It was Venerable Ānanda, sir."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "But in what way were you
inspiring the mendicants with a talk on the summary recital and the
analysis of the one who has one fine night?"

"I was doing so in this way, sir," replied Ānanda.

> "Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future.\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present phenomenon\
> you clearly discern in every case.\
> The unfaltering, the unshakable:\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.

And how do you run back to the past?
...[2388](endnotes.xhtml_note-2388){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2388
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how do you not run back to the past? ...

And how do you anticipate the future? ...

And how do you not anticipate the future? ...

And how do you falter amid presently arisen phenomena? ...

And how do you not falter amid presently arisen phenomena? ... That's
how you don't falter amid presently arisen phenomena.

> 'Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future. ...
>
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.'

That's how I was inspiring the mendicants with a talk on the summary
recital and the analysis of the one who has one fine night."

"Good, good, Ānanda. It's good that you were inspiring the mendicants
with a talk on the summary recital and the analysis of the one who has
one fine night."

And the Buddha repeated the verses and analysis once more.

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn133">

### [MN 133]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mahākaccāna and One Fine Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahākaccānabhaddekarattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha in the Hot Springs
Monastery.[2389](endnotes.xhtml_note-2389){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2389
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Samiddhi rose at the crack of dawn and went to the hot
springs to
bathe.[2390](endnotes.xhtml_note-2390){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2390
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he had bathed and emerged from the
water he stood in one robe drying his limbs.

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire hot
springs, went up to Samiddhi, stood to one side, and said to Samiddhi:

"Mendicant, do you remember the summary recital and the analysis of the
one who has one fine night?"

"No, reverend, I do not. Do you?"

"I also do not. But do you remember just the verses on the one who has
one fine
night?"[2391](endnotes.xhtml_note-2391){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2391
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I do not. Do you?"

"I also do not. Learn the summary recital and the analysis of the one
who has one fine night, mendicant, memorize it, and remember it. It is
beneficial and relates to the fundamentals of the spiritual life."

That's what that deity said, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, Samiddhi went to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then he added:

"Sir, please teach me the summary recital and the analysis of the one
who has one fine night."

"Well then, mendicant, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Samiddhi replied. The Buddha said this:

> "Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future.\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present phenomenon\
> you clearly discern in every case.\
> The unfaltering, the unshakable:\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his
dwelling.[2392](endnotes.xhtml_note-2392){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2392
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. ...

Who can explain in detail the meaning of this brief summary given by the
Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought:

"This Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his
sensible spiritual
companions.[2393](endnotes.xhtml_note-2393){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2393
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He is capable of explaining in detail the
meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha. Let's go to
him, and ask him about this matter."

Then those mendicants went to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with
him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down
to one side. They told him what had happened, and said:

"May Venerable Mahākaccāna please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves. Such is the
consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the
Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me about this
matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer. Still, Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha
and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākaccāna said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

> 'Don't run back to the past ...\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.'

And this is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary
recital.

And how do you run back to the past? Consciousness gets tied up there
with desire and lust, thinking: 'In the past I had such eyes and such
sights.'[2394](endnotes.xhtml_note-2394){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2394
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} So you take pleasure in that, and that's
when you run back to the past.

Consciousness gets tied up there with desire and lust, thinking: 'In the
past I had such ears and such sounds ... such a nose and such smells ...
such a tongue and such tastes ... such a body and such touches ... such
a mind and such ideas.' So you take pleasure in that, and that's when
you run back to the past. That's how you run back to the past.

And how do you not run back to the past? Consciousness doesn't get tied
up there with desire and lust, thinking: 'In the past I had such eyes
and such sights.' So you don't take pleasure in that, and that's when
you no longer run back to the past.

Consciousness doesn't get tied up there with desire and lust, thinking:
'In the past I had such ears and such sounds ... such a nose and such
smells ... such a tongue and such tastes ... such a body and such
touches ... such a mind and such ideas.' So you don't take pleasure in
that, and that's when you no longer run back to the past. That's how you
don't run back to the past.

And how do you anticipate the future? The heart is set on getting what
it does not have, thinking: 'May I have such eyes and such sights in the
future.' So you take pleasure in that, and that's when you anticipate
the future. The heart is set on getting what it does not have, thinking:
'May I have such ears and such sounds ... such a nose and such smells
... such a tongue and such tastes ... such a body and such touches ...
such a mind and such ideas in the future.' So you take pleasure in that,
and that's when you anticipate the future. That's how you anticipate the
future.

And how do you not anticipate the future? The heart is not set on
getting what it does not have, thinking: 'May I have such eyes and such
sights in the future.' So you don't take pleasure in that, and that's
when you no longer anticipate the future. The heart is not set on
getting what it does not have, thinking: 'May I have such ears and such
sounds ... such a nose and such smells ... such a tongue and such tastes
... such a body and such touches ... such a mind and such ideas in the
future.' So you don't take pleasure in that, and that's when you no
longer anticipate the future. That's how you don't anticipate the
future.

And how do you falter amid presently arisen phenomena? Both the eye and
sights are presently arisen. If consciousness gets tied up there in the
present with desire and lust, you take pleasure in that, and that's when
you falter amid presently arisen phenomena. Both the ear and sounds ...
nose and smells ... tongue and tastes ... body and touches ... mind and
ideas[2395](endnotes.xhtml_note-2395){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2395
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} are presently arisen. If consciousness gets
tied up there in the present with desire and lust, you take pleasure in
that, and that's when you falter amid presently arisen phenomena. That's
how you falter amid presently arisen phenomena.

And how do you not falter amid presently arisen phenomena? Both the eye
and sights are presently arisen. If consciousness doesn't get tied up
there in the present with desire and lust, you don't take pleasure in
that, and that's when you no longer falter amid presently arisen
phenomena. Both the ear and sounds ... nose and smells ... tongue and
tastes ... body and touches ... mind and ideas are presently arisen. If
consciousness doesn't get tied up there in the present with desire and
lust, you don't take pleasure in that, and that's when you no longer
falter amid presently arisen phenomena. That's how you don't falter amid
presently arisen phenomena.

This is how I understand the detailed meaning of that brief summary
recital given by the Buddha.

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

Then those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what Mahākaccāna
said, rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened, adding:

"Mahākaccāna clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with
these words and phrases."

"Mahākaccāna is astute, mendicants, he has great wisdom. If you came to
me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as
Mahākaccāna. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn134">

### [MN 134]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lomasakaṅgiya and One Fine Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lomasakaṅgiyabhaddekarattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was staying in the Sakyan
country at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree
Monastery.[2396](endnotes.xhtml_note-2396){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2396
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then, late at night, the glorious god Candana, lighting up the entire
Banyan Tree Monastery, went up to the Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, and stood
to one side. Standing to one side, he said to
Lomasakaṅgiya:[2397](endnotes.xhtml_note-2397){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2397
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Mendicant, do you remember the summary recital and the analysis of the
one who has one fine night?"

"No, reverend, I do not. Do you?"

"I also do not. But do you remember just the verses on the one who has
one fine night?"

"I do not. Do you?"

"I do."

"How do you remember the verses on the one who has one fine night?"

"This one time, the Buddha was staying among the gods of the
thirty-three at the root of the Shady Orchid Tree on the stone spread
with a cream
rug.[2398](endnotes.xhtml_note-2398){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2398
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There he taught the summary recital and the
analysis of the one who has one fine night to the gods of the
thirty-three:

> 'Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future.\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present phenomenon\
> you clearly discern in every case.\
> The unfaltering, the unshakable:\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.'

That's how I remember the verses of the one who has one fine night.
Learn the summary recital and the analysis of the one who has one fine
night, mendicant, memorize it, and remember it. It is beneficial and
relates to the fundamentals of the spiritual life."

That's what the god Candana said before vanishing right there.

Then Lomasakaṅgiya set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and
robe, set out for Sāvatthī. Eventually he came to Sāvatthī and Jeta's
Grove. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told
him what had happened. Then he added:

"Sir, please teach me the summary recital and the analysis of the one
who has one fine night."

"But mendicant, do you know that god?"

"I do not, sir."

"That god was named Candana. Candana pays attention, applies the mind,
concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens to the
teaching.[2399](endnotes.xhtml_note-2399){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2399
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Well then, mendicant, listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Lomasakaṅgiya replied. The Buddha said this:

> "Don't run back to the past,\
> don't anticipate the future.\
> What's past is left behind,\
> the future has not arrived;
>
> and any present phenomenon\
> you clearly discern in every case.\
> The unfaltering, the unshakable:\
> having known that, foster it.
>
> Today's the day to keenly work---\
> who knows, tomorrow may bring death!\
> For there is no bargain to be struck\
> with Death and his mighty horde.
>
> One who keenly meditates like this,\
> tireless all night and day:\
> that's who has one fine night---\
> so declares the peaceful sage.

And how do you run back to the past? ...
"[2400](endnotes.xhtml_note-2400){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2400
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya
approved what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn135">

### [MN 135]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Analysis of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷakammavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2401](endnotes.xhtml_note-2401){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2401
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's son, approached the Buddha,
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why even among
those who are human beings some are seen to be inferior and superior?
For people are seen who are short-lived and long-lived, sickly and
healthy, ugly and beautiful, insignificant and illustrious, poor and
rich, from low and eminent families, witless and wise. What is the
reason why even among those who are human beings some are seen to be
inferior and superior?"

"Student, sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to
their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their
refuge.[2402](endnotes.xhtml_note-2402){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2402
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is deeds that divide beings into
inferior and superior."

"I don't understand the meaning of what Mister Gotama has said in brief,
without explaining the details. Mister Gotama, please teach me this
matter in detail so I can understand the meaning."

"Well then, student, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Subha. The Buddha said this:

"Take some woman or man who kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living
beings.[2403](endnotes.xhtml_note-2403){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2403
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, when
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. If they're not reborn in a place of
loss, but return to the human realm, then wherever they're reborn
they're
short-lived.[2404](endnotes.xhtml_note-2404){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2404
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For killing living creatures is the path
leading to a short lifespan.

But take some woman or man who gives up killing living creatures. They
renounce the rod and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full
of sympathy for all living beings. Because of undertaking such deeds,
when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm. If they're not reborn in a heavenly realm, but return
to the human realm, then wherever they're reborn they're long-lived. For
not killing living creatures is the path leading to a long lifespan.

Take some woman or man who habitually hurts living creatures with a
fist, stone, rod, or sword. Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're sickly ...

But take some woman or man who would never hurt living creatures with a
fist, stone, rod, or
sword.[2405](endnotes.xhtml_note-2405){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2405
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a heavenly realm ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're healthy ...

Take some woman or man who is irritable and bad-tempered. Even when
lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile,
and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and
bitterness.[2406](endnotes.xhtml_note-2406){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2406
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're ugly ...

But take some woman or man who isn't irritable and bad-tempered. Even
when heavily criticized, they don't lose their temper, become annoyed,
hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness.
Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they're reborn in a
heavenly realm ... or if they return to the human realm, they're lovely
...[2407](endnotes.xhtml_note-2407){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2407
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Take some woman or man who is jealous. They envy, resent, and begrudge
the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given
to
others.[2408](endnotes.xhtml_note-2408){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2408
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're insignificant ...

But take some woman or man who is not jealous ... Because of undertaking
such deeds, after death they're reborn in a heavenly realm ... or if
they return to the human realm, they're illustrious ...

Take some woman or man who doesn't give to ascetics or brahmins such
things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting.[2409](endnotes.xhtml_note-2409){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2409
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're poor ...

But take some woman or man who does give to ascetics or brahmins ...
Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they're reborn in a
heavenly realm ... or if they return to the human realm, they're rich
...

Take some woman or man who is obstinate and arrogant. They don't bow to
those they should bow to. They don't rise up for them, offer them a
seat, make way for them, or honor, respect, esteem, or venerate those
who are worthy of
such.[2410](endnotes.xhtml_note-2410){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2410
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of undertaking such deeds, after
death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to the
human realm, they're reborn in a low class family ...

But take some woman or man who is not obstinate and arrogant ... Because
of undertaking such deeds, after death they're reborn in a heavenly
realm ... or if they return to the human realm, they're reborn in an
eminent family ...

Take some woman or man who doesn't approach an ascetic or brahmin to
ask:[2411](endnotes.xhtml_note-2411){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2411
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Sir, what is skillful and what is
unskillful? What is blameworthy and what is blameless? What should be
cultivated and what should not be cultivated? What kind of action will
lead to my lasting harm and suffering? Or what kind of action will lead
to my lasting welfare and happiness?' Because of undertaking such deeds,
after death they're reborn in a place of loss ... or if they return to
the human realm, they're witless ...

But take some woman or man who does approach an ascetic or brahmin to
ask: 'Sir, what is skillful and what is unskillful? What is blameworthy
and what is blameless? What should be cultivated and what should not be
cultivated? What kind of action will lead to my lasting harm and
suffering? Or what kind of action will lead to my lasting welfare and
happiness?' Because of undertaking such deeds, when their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. If
they're not reborn in a heavenly realm, but return to the human realm,
then wherever they're reborn they're very wise. For asking questions of
ascetics or brahmins is the path leading to wisdom.

So it is the way people live that makes them how they are, whether
short-lived or long-lived, sickly or healthy, ugly or lovely,
insignificant or illustrious, poor or rich, in a low class or eminent
family, or witless or wise.

Sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds.
Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge. It is deeds that
divide beings into inferior and superior."

When he had spoken, Subha said to him, "Excellent, Mister Gotama!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Gotama has
made the Teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama,
to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha.[2412](endnotes.xhtml_note-2412){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2412
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn136">

### [MN 136]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Longer Analysis of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahākammavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time Venerable Samiddhi was staying in a wilderness hut.
Then as the wanderer Potaliputta was going for a walk he came up to
Venerable Samiddhi and exchanged greetings with
him.[2413](endnotes.xhtml_note-2413){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2413
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Reverend Samiddhi, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the
ascetic Gotama: 'Deeds by way of body and speech are done in vain. Only
mental deeds are real.' And: 'There is such an attainment where the one
who enters it does not feel anything at all.'"

"Don't say that, Reverend Potaliputta, don't say that! Don't
misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha is not
good. And the Buddha would not say this: 'Deeds by way of body and
speech are done in vain. Only mental deeds are
real.'[2414](endnotes.xhtml_note-2414){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2414
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But, reverend, there is such an attainment
where the one who enters it does not feel anything at
all."[2415](endnotes.xhtml_note-2415){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2415
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Reverend Samiddhi, how long has it been since you went forth?"

"Not long, reverend: three years."

"Well now, what are we to say to the senior mendicants, when even such a
junior mendicant imagines their Teacher needs defending? After doing an
intentional deed by way of body, speech, or mind, reverend, what does
one feel?"

"After doing an intentional deed by way of body, speech, or mind,
reverend, one feels
suffering."[2416](endnotes.xhtml_note-2416){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2416
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then, neither approving nor dismissing
Samiddhi's statement, Potaliputta got up from his seat and left.

Soon after he had left, Venerable Samiddhi went to Venerable Ānanda, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side, and informed Ānanda of all they had
discussed.

When he had spoken, Ānanda said to him, "Reverend Samiddhi, we should
see the Buddha about this matter. Come, let's go to the Buddha and
inform him about this. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," Samiddhi replied.

Then Ānanda and Samiddhi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

When they had spoken, the Buddha said to Ānanda, "I don't recall even
seeing the wanderer Potaliputta, Ānanda, so how could we have had such a
discussion? The wanderer Potaliputta's question should have been
answered after analyzing it, but this futile man answered
categorically."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "But perhaps, sir,
Venerable Samiddhi spoke in reference to the statement: 'Suffering
includes whatever is felt.'"

But the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "See what this futile man Udāyī
comes up
with?[2417](endnotes.xhtml_note-2417){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2417
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} I knew that he was coming up with something
irrational. Right from the start Potaliputta asked about the three
feelings. Suppose the futile man Samiddhi had answered the wanderer
Potaliputta's question like this: 'After doing an intentional deed to be
experienced as pleasant by way of body, speech, or mind, one feels
pleasure. After doing an intentional deed to be experienced as painful
by way of body, speech, or mind, one feels pain. After doing an
intentional deed to be experienced as neutral by way of body, speech, or
mind, one feels neutral.' Answering in this way, Samiddhi would have
rightly answered Potaliputta.

Still, who are those foolish and incompetent wanderers of other
religions to understand the Realized One's great analysis of deeds? If
you would all listen, Ānanda, I will explain the Realized One's great
analysis of
deeds."[2418](endnotes.xhtml_note-2418){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2418
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
explain the great analysis of deeds. The mendicants will listen and
remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, these four people are found in the world. What four? It's when
a person here kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual
misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, and have wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell.

But some other person here kills living creatures, steals, and commits
sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, and have wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.

But some other person here refrains from killing living creatures,
stealing, committing sexual misconduct, or using speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted,
and have right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

But some other person here refrains from killing living creatures,
stealing, committing sexual misconduct, or using speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted,
and have right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

Now, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and
diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that it gives rise to clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman. With that clairvoyance they see that
person[2419](endnotes.xhtml_note-2419){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2419
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} here who killed living creatures, stole,
and committed sexual misconduct; who used speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical; and who was covetous, malicious, and had wrong
view. And they see that, when their body breaks up, after death, that
person is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
They say: 'It seems that there is such a thing as bad deeds, and the
result of bad
conduct.[2420](endnotes.xhtml_note-2420){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2420
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For I saw a person here who killed living
creatures ... and had wrong view. And when their body broke up, after
death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.'[2421](endnotes.xhtml_note-2421){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2421
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They say: 'It seems that everyone who kills
living creatures ... and has wrong view is reborn in
hell.[2422](endnotes.xhtml_note-2422){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2422
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Those whose notion is this have the right
notion. Those whose notion is otherwise have a wrong notion.
'[2423](endnotes.xhtml_note-2423){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2423
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And so they obstinately stick to what they
have known, seen, and understood for themselves, insisting that: 'This
is the only truth, anything else is
futile.'[2424](endnotes.xhtml_note-2424){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2424
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But some other ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that it
gives rise to clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman. With that
clairvoyance they see that person here who killed living creatures ...
and had wrong view. And they see that that person is reborn in a
heavenly realm. They say: 'It seems that there is no such thing as bad
deeds, and the result of bad conduct. For I have seen a person here who
killed living creatures ... and had wrong view. And I saw that that
person was reborn in a heavenly realm.' They say: 'It seems that
everyone who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view is reborn in
a heavenly realm. Those whose notion is this have the right notion.
Those whose notion is otherwise have a wrong notion. ' And so they
obstinately stick to what they have known, seen, and understood for
themselves, insisting that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is
futile.'

Take some ascetic or brahmin who with clairvoyance sees a person here
who refrained from killing living creatures ... and had right view. And
they see that that person is reborn in a heavenly realm. They say: 'It
seems that there is such a thing as good deeds, and the result of good
conduct. For I have seen a person here who refrained from killing living
creatures ... and had right view. And I saw that that person was reborn
in a heavenly realm.' They say: 'It seems that everyone who refrains
from killing living creatures ... and has right view is reborn in a
heavenly realm. Those whose notion is this have the right notion. Those
whose notion is otherwise have a wrong notion. ' And so they obstinately
stick to what they have known, seen, and understood for themselves,
insisting that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'

Take some ascetic or brahmin who with clairvoyance sees a person here
who refrained from killing living creatures ... and had right view. And
they see that that person is reborn in hell. They say: 'It seems that
there is no such thing as good deeds, and the result of good conduct.
For I have seen a person here who refrained from killing living
creatures ... and had right view. And I saw that that person was reborn
in hell.' They say: 'It seems that everyone who refrains from killing
living creatures ... and has right view is reborn in hell. Those whose
notion is this have the right notion. Those whose notion is otherwise
have a wrong notion. ' And so they obstinately stick to what they have
known, seen, and understood for themselves, insisting that: 'This is the
only truth, anything else is futile.'

In this case, when an ascetic or brahmin says this: 'It seems that there
is such a thing as bad deeds, and the result of bad conduct,' I grant
them that. And when they say: 'I have seen a person here who killed
living creatures ... and had wrong view. And after death, they were
reborn in hell,' I also grant them that. But when they say: 'It seems
that everyone who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view is
reborn in hell,' I don't grant them that. And when they say: 'Those
whose notion is this have the right notion. Those whose notion is
otherwise have a wrong notion. ' I also don't grant them that. And when
they obstinately stick to what they have known, seen, and understood for
themselves, insisting that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is
futile,' I also don't grant them that. Why is that? Because the Realized
One's knowledge of the great analysis of deeds is otherwise.

In this case, when an ascetic or brahmin says this: 'It seems that there
is no such thing as bad deeds, and the result of bad conduct,' I don't
grant them that. But when they say: 'I have seen a person here who
killed living creatures ... and had wrong view. And I saw that that
person was reborn in a heavenly realm,' I grant them that. But when they
say: 'It seems that everyone who kills living creatures ... and has
wrong view is reborn in a heavenly realm,' I don't grant them that. ...
Because the Realized One's knowledge of the great analysis of deeds is
otherwise.

In this case, when an ascetic or brahmin says this: 'It seems that there
is such a thing as good deeds, and the result of good conduct,' I grant
them that. And when they say: 'I have seen a person here who refrained
from killing living creatures ... and had right view. And I saw that
that person was reborn in a heavenly realm,' I grant them that. But when
they say: 'It seems that everyone who refrains from killing living
creatures ... and has right view is reborn in a heavenly realm,' I don't
grant them that. ... Because the Realized One's knowledge of the great
analysis of deeds is otherwise.

In this case, when an ascetic or brahmin says this: 'It seems that there
is no such thing as good deeds, and the result of good conduct,' I don't
grant them that. But when they say: 'I have seen a person here who
refrained from killing living creatures ... and had right view. And
after death, they were reborn in hell,' I grant them that. But when they
say: 'It seems that everyone who refrains from killing living creatures
... and has right view is reborn in hell,' I don't grant them that. But
when they say: 'Those who know this are right. Those who know something
else are wrong,' I also don't grant them that. And when they obstinately
stick to what they have known, seen, and understood for themselves,
insisting that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I
also don't grant them that. Why is that? Because the Realized One's
knowledge of the great analysis of deeds is otherwise.

Now, Ānanda, take the case of the person here who killed living
creatures ... and had wrong view, and who, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. That bad deed of theirs that is to be experienced as painful was
either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they
undertook wrong
view.[2425](endnotes.xhtml_note-2425){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2425
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And that's why, when their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But anyone here who kills living creatures ... and has
wrong view experiences the result of that in the present life, or in the
next life, or in some subsequent period.

Now, Ānanda, take the case of the person here who killed living
creatures ... and had wrong view, and who is reborn in a heavenly realm.
That good deed of theirs that is to be experienced as pleasurable was
either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they
undertook right view. And that's why, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. But anyone here
who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view experiences the result
of that in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent
period.

Now, Ānanda, take the case of the person here who refrained from killing
living creatures ... and had right view, and who is reborn in a heavenly
realm. That good deed of theirs that is to be experienced as pleasurable
was either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they
undertook right view. And that's why, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. But anyone here
who refrains from killing living creatures ... and has right view
experiences the result of that in the present life, or in the next life,
or in some subsequent period.

Now, Ānanda, take the case of the person here who refrained from killing
living creatures ... and had right view, and who is reborn in hell. That
bad deed of theirs that is to be experienced as painful was either done
previously, or later, or else at the time of death they undertook wrong
view. And that's why, when their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But anyone
here who refrains from killing living creatures ... and has right view
experiences the result of that in the present life, or in the next life,
or in some subsequent period.

So, Ānanda, there are deeds that are ineffective and appear ineffective.
There are deeds that are ineffective but appear effective. There are
deeds that are effective and appear effective. And there are deeds that
are effective but appear ineffective."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn137">

### [MN 137]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Analysis of the Six Sense Fields ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saḷāyatanavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I shall teach you the analysis of the six sense
fields.[2426](endnotes.xhtml_note-2426){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2426
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"'The six interior sense fields should be understood. The six exterior
sense fields should be understood. The six classes of consciousness
should be understood. The six classes of contact should be understood.
The eighteen mental preoccupations should be understood. The thirty-six
positions of sentient beings should be understood. Therein, relying on
this, give up that. The Noble One cultivates the establishment of
mindfulness in three cases, by virtue of which they are a Teacher worthy
to instruct a group. Of all meditation tutors, it is he that is called
the supreme guide for those who wish to train.' This is the summary
recital for the analysis of the six sense fields.

'The six interior sense fields should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? There are the sense fields of the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. 'The six interior sense fields should be
understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The six exterior sense fields should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? There are the sense fields of sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. 'The six exterior sense
fields should be understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it.

'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? There are eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind consciousness. 'The six classes of consciousness should be
understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The six classes of contact should be understood.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? There is contact through the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and mind. 'The six classes of contact should be
understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The eighteen mental preoccupations should be
understood.'[2427](endnotes.xhtml_note-2427){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2427
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that's a
basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. Hearing a sound with the
ear ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with the
tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ... Becoming conscious of an idea with the
mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for happiness or
sadness or equanimity. So there are six preoccupations with happiness,
six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity.
'The eighteen mental preoccupations should be understood.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'The thirty-six positions of sentient beings should be understood.'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are six kinds of lay
happiness and six kinds of renunciate happiness. There are six kinds of
lay sadness and six kinds of renunciate sadness. There are six kinds of
lay equanimity and six kinds of renunciate equanimity.

And in this context what are the six kinds of lay happiness? There are
sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasing, connected with the worldly pleasures of the flesh. Happiness
arises when you regard it as a gain to obtain such sights, or when you
recollect sights you formerly obtained that have passed, ceased, and
perished. Such happiness is called lay happiness. There are sounds known
by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue
... Touches known by the body ... Ideas known by the mind, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasing, connected with the world's
material delights. Happiness arises when you regard it as a gain to
obtain such ideas, or when you recollect ideas you formerly obtained
that have passed, ceased, and perished. Such happiness is called lay
happiness. These are the six kinds of lay happiness.

And in this context what are the six kinds of renunciate happiness? When
you've understood the impermanence of sights---their perishing, fading
away, and cessation---happiness arises as you truly understand through
right understanding that both formerly and now all those sights are
impermanent, suffering, and perishable. Such happiness is called
renunciate happiness. When you've understood the impermanence of sounds
... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas---their perishing, fading
away, and cessation---happiness arises as you truly understand through
right understanding that both formerly and now all those ideas are
impermanent, suffering, and perishable. Such happiness is called
renunciate happiness. These are the six kinds of renunciate happiness.

And in this context what are the six kinds of lay sadness? There are
sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasing, connected with the world's material delights. Sadness arises
when you regard it as a loss to lose such sights, or when you recollect
sights you formerly lost that have passed, ceased, and perished. Such
sadness is called lay sadness. There are sounds known by the ear ...
There are smells known by the nose ... There are tastes known by the
tongue ... There are touches known by the body ... There are ideas known
by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasing,
connected with the worldly pleasures of the flesh. Sadness arises when
you regard it as a loss to lose such ideas, or when you recollect ideas
you formerly lost that have passed, ceased, and perished. Such sadness
is called lay sadness. These are the six kinds of lay sadness.

And in this context what are the six kinds of renunciate sadness? When
you've understood the impermanence of sights---their perishing, fading
away, and cessation---you truly understand through right understanding
that both formerly and now all those sights are impermanent, suffering,
and perishable. Upon seeing this, you give rise to yearning for the
supreme liberations: 'Oh, when will I enter and remain in the same
dimension that the noble ones enter and remain in today?' When you give
rise to yearning for the supreme liberations like this, sadness arises
because of the
yearning.[2428](endnotes.xhtml_note-2428){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2428
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such sadness is called renunciate sadness.
When you've understood the impermanence of sounds ... smells ... tastes
... touches ... ideas---their perishing, fading away, and
cessation---you truly understand through right understanding that both
formerly and now all those ideas are impermanent, suffering, and
perishable. Upon seeing this, you give rise to yearning for the supreme
liberations: 'Oh, when will I enter and remain in the same dimension
that the noble ones enter and remain in today?' When you give rise to
yearning for the supreme liberations like this, sadness arises because
of the yearning. Such sadness is called renunciate sadness. These are
the six kinds of renunciate sadness.

And in this context what are the six kinds of lay equanimity? When
seeing a sight with the eye, equanimity arises for the unlearned
ordinary person---a foolish ordinary person who has not overcome their
limitations and the results of deeds, and is blind to the drawbacks.
Such equanimity does not transcend the sight. That's why it's called lay
equanimity. When hearing a sound with the ear ... When smelling an odor
with the nose ... When tasting a flavor with the tongue ... When feeling
a touch with the body ... When knowing an idea with the mind, equanimity
arises for the unlearned ordinary person---a foolish ordinary person who
has not overcome their limitations and the results of deeds, and is
blind to the drawbacks. Such equanimity does not transcend the idea.
That's why it's called lay equanimity. These are the six kinds of lay
equanimity.

And in this context what are the six kinds of renunciate equanimity?
When you've understood the impermanence of sights---their perishing,
fading away, and cessation---equanimity arises as you truly understand
through right understanding that both formerly and now all those sights
are impermanent, suffering, and perishable. Such equanimity transcends
the sight. That's why it's called renunciate equanimity. When you've
understood the impermanence of sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches
... ideas---their perishing, fading away, and cessation---equanimity
arises as you truly understand through right understanding that both
formerly and now all those ideas are impermanent, suffering, and
perishable. Such equanimity transcends the idea. That's why it's called
renunciate equanimity. These are the six kinds of renunciate equanimity.
'The thirty-six positions of sentient beings should be understood.'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Therein, relying on this, give up that.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it?

Therein, by relying and depending on the six kinds of renunciate
happiness, give up and go beyond the six kinds of lay happiness. That's
how they are given up.

Therein, by relying on the six kinds of renunciate sadness, give up the
six kinds of lay sadness. That's how they are given up.

Therein, by relying on the six kinds of renunciate equanimity, give up
the six kinds of lay equanimity. That's how they are given up.

Therein, by relying on the six kinds of renunciate happiness, give up
the six kinds of renunciate sadness. That's how they are given up.

Therein, by relying on the six kinds of renunciate equanimity, give up
the six kinds of renunciate happiness. That's how they are given up.

There is equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity, and
equanimity that is unified, based on unity.

And what is equanimity based on diversity? There is equanimity towards
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. This is equanimity based on
diversity.

And what is equanimity based on unity? There is equanimity based on the
dimensions of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, and
neither perception nor non-perception. This is equanimity based on
unity.

Therein, relying on equanimity based on unity, give up equanimity based
on diversity. That's how it is given up.

Relying on not being determined by that, give up equanimity based on
unity. That's how it is given up. 'Therein, relying on this, give up
that.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The Noble One cultivates the establishment of mindfulness in three
cases, by virtue of which they are a Teacher worthy to instruct a
group.'[2429](endnotes.xhtml_note-2429){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2429
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?

The first case is when the Teacher teaches Dhamma to his disciples out
of kindness and sympathy: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your
happiness.' But their disciples don't want to listen. They don't
actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away
from the Teacher's instruction. In this case the Realized One is not
unhappy, he does not feel unhappiness. He remains unfestering, mindful
and
aware.[2430](endnotes.xhtml_note-2430){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2430
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the first case in which the Noble
One cultivates the establishment of mindfulness.

The next case is when the Teacher teaches Dhamma to his disciples out of
kindness and sympathy: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your
happiness.' And some of their disciples don't want to listen. They don't
actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away
from the Teacher's instruction. But some of their disciples do want to
listen. They actively listen and try to understand. They don't proceed
having turned away from the Teacher's instruction. In this case the
Realized One is not unhappy, nor is he happy. Rejecting both unhappiness
and happiness, he remains equanimous, mindful and aware. This is the
second case in which the Noble One cultivates the establishment of
mindfulness.

The next case is when the Teacher teaches Dhamma to his disciples out of
kindness and sympathy: 'This is for your welfare. This is for your
happiness.' And their disciples want to listen. They actively listen and
try to understand. They don't proceed having turned away from the
Teacher's instruction. In this case the Realized One is happy, he does
feel happiness. He remains unfestering, mindful and aware. This is the
third case in which the Noble One cultivates the establishment of
mindfulness. 'The Noble One cultivates the establishment of mindfulness
in three cases, by virtue of which they are a Teacher worthy to instruct
a group.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Of all meditation tutors, it is he that is called the supreme guide for
those who wish to train.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Driven by an elephant trainer, an elephant in training proceeds in just
one
direction:[2431](endnotes.xhtml_note-2431){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2431
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} east, west, north, or south.

Driven by a horse trainer, a horse in training proceeds in just one
direction: east, west, north, or south. Driven by an ox trainer, an ox
in training proceeds in just one direction: east, west, north, or south.
But driven by the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, a person in training proceeds in eight
directions:[2432](endnotes.xhtml_note-2432){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2432
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Having physical form, they see forms. This is the first direction. Not
perceiving physical form internally, they see forms externally. This is
the second direction. They're focused only on beauty. This is the third
direction. Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension
of infinite space. This is the fourth direction. Going totally beyond
the dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This
is the fifth direction. Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they enter and
remain in the dimension of nothingness. This is the sixth direction.
Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh direction. Going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of
perception and feeling. This is the eighth direction. Driven by the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, a person in
training proceeds in these eight directions.

'Of all meditation tutors, it is he that is called the supreme guide for
those who wish to train.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn138">

### [MN 138]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Summary Recital and its Analysis ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uddesavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I shall teach you a summary recital and its analysis.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"A mendicant should examine in any such a way that their consciousness
is neither scattered and diffused externally nor stuck internally, and
they are not anxious because of
grasping.[2433](endnotes.xhtml_note-2433){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2433
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When this is the case and they are no
longer anxious, there is for them no coming to be of the origin of
suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the future."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his
dwelling.[2434](endnotes.xhtml_note-2434){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2434
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. Who can explain in detail the meaning
of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought, "This Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by
the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual
companions.[2435](endnotes.xhtml_note-2435){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2435
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} He is capable of explaining in detail the
meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha. Let's go to
him, and ask him about this matter."

Then those mendicants went to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with
him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down
to one side. They told him what had happened, and said, "May Venerable
Mahākaccāna please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves. Such is the
consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the
Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me about this
matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer. Still, Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha
and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākaccāna said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail: 'A mendicant should
examine in any such a way that their consciousness is neither scattered
and diffused externally nor stuck internally, and they are not anxious
because of grasping. When this is the case and they are no longer
anxious, there is for them no coming to be of the origin of
suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the future.' And this is
how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital.

And how is consciousness scattered and diffused externally? Take a
mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. Their consciousness follows
after the features of that sight, tied, attached, and fettered to
gratification in its features. So their consciousness is said to be
scattered and diffused
externally.[2436](endnotes.xhtml_note-2436){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2436
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, their consciousness follows after the
features of that idea, tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in
its features. So their consciousness is said to be scattered and
diffused externally. That's how consciousness is scattered and diffused
externally.

And how is consciousness not scattered and diffused externally? Take a
mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. Their consciousness doesn't
follow after the features of that sight, and is not tied, attached, and
fettered to gratification in its features. So their consciousness is
said to be not scattered and diffused externally. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, their
consciousness doesn't follow after the features of that idea, and is not
tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in its features. So their
consciousness is said to be not scattered and diffused externally.
That's how consciousness is not scattered and diffused externally.

And how is their consciousness stuck internally? Take a mendicant who,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. Their consciousness follows after that rapture and bliss
born of seclusion, tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in that
rapture and bliss born of seclusion. So their mind is said to be stuck
internally.[2437](endnotes.xhtml_note-2437){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2437
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. Their
consciousness follows after that rapture and bliss born of immersion,
tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in that rapture and bliss
born of immersion. So their mind is said to be stuck internally.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Their
consciousness follows after that equanimity, tied, attached, and
fettered to gratification in that bliss with equanimity. So their mind
is said to be stuck
internally.[2438](endnotes.xhtml_note-2438){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2438
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. Their
consciousness follows after that neutral feeling, tied, attached, and
fettered to gratification in that neutral feeling. So their mind is said
to be stuck internally. That's how their consciousness is stuck
internally.

And how is their consciousness not stuck internally? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. Their consciousness doesn't follow after that
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, and is not tied, attached, and
fettered to gratification in that rapture and bliss born of seclusion.
So their mind is said to be not stuck
internally.[2439](endnotes.xhtml_note-2439){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2439
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, they enter the second absorption ... Their consciousness
doesn't follow after that rapture and bliss born of immersion ...

Furthermore, they enter and remain in the third absorption ... Their
consciousness doesn't follow after that equanimity, and is not tied,
attached, and fettered to gratification in that bliss with equanimity.
So their mind is said to be not stuck internally.

Furthermore, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption ... Their
consciousness doesn't follow after that neutral feeling, and is not
tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in that neutral feeling.
So their mind is said to be not stuck internally. That's how their
consciousness is not stuck internally.

And how are they anxious because of grasping? It's when an unlearned
ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true
persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true
persons. They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or
self in form. But that form of theirs decays and perishes, and
consciousness latches on to the perishing of form. Anxieties occupy
their mind, born of latching on to the perishing of form, and
originating in accordance with natural principles. So they become
frightened, worried, concerned, and anxious because of grasping. They
regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness as self,
self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness. But that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, and
consciousness latches on to the perishing of consciousness. Anxieties
occupy their mind, born of latching on to the perishing of
consciousness, and originating in accordance with natural principles. So
they become frightened, worried, concerned, and anxious because of
grasping. That's how they are anxious because of grasping.

And how are they not anxious because of grasping? It's when a learned
noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in
the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons, and are
skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They don't
regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
When that form of theirs decays and perishes, consciousness doesn't
latch on to the perishing of form. Anxieties---born of latching on to
the perishing of form and originating in accordance with natural
principles---don't occupy their mind. So they don't become frightened,
worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping. They don't regard
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness as self, self as
having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.
When that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, consciousness
doesn't latch on to the perishing of consciousness. Anxieties---born of
latching on to the perishing of consciousness and originating in
accordance with natural principles---don't occupy their mind. So they
don't become frightened, worried, concerned, or anxious because of
grasping. That's how they are not anxious because of grasping.

The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling
without explaining the meaning in detail: 'A mendicant should examine in
any such a way that their consciousness is neither scattered and
diffused externally nor stuck internally, and they are not anxious
because of grasping. When this is the case and they are no longer
anxious, there is for them no coming to be of the origin of
suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the future.' And this is
how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital. If you
wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

Then those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what Mahākaccāna
said, rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened, adding:

"Mahākaccāna clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with
these words and phrases."

"Mahākaccāna is astute, mendicants, he has great wisdom. If you came to
me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as
Mahākaccāna. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn139">

### [MN 139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Analysis of Non-Conflict ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Araṇavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I shall teach you the analysis of
non-conflict.[2440](endnotes.xhtml_note-2440){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2440
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Don't indulge in sensual pleasure, which is low, crude, ordinary,
ignoble, and pointless. And don't indulge in self-mortification, which
is painful, ignoble, and
pointless.[2441](endnotes.xhtml_note-2441){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2441
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized
One understood the middle way of practice, which gives vision and
knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and
extinguishment. Know what it means to flatter and to rebuke. Knowing
these, avoid them, and just teach Dhamma. Know how to evaluate different
kinds of pleasure. Knowing this, pursue inner pleasure. Don't talk
behind people's backs, and don't speak sharply in their presence. Don't
speak hurriedly. Don't insist on popular terms and don't overstep normal
labels.[2442](endnotes.xhtml_note-2442){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2442
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the summary recital for the
analysis of non-conflict.

'Don't indulge in sensual pleasure, which is low, crude, ordinary,
ignoble, and pointless. And don't indulge in self-mortification, which
is painful, ignoble, and pointless.' That's what I said, but why did I
say it? Indulging in the happiness of the pleasure linked to sensuality
is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It is a principle beset
by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. Breaking off
such indulgence is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and fever,
and it is the right way. Indulging in self-mortification is painful,
ignoble, and pointless. It is a principle beset by pain, harm, stress,
and fever, and it is the wrong way. Breaking off such indulgence is a
principle free of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the right
way. 'Don't indulge in sensual pleasure, which is low, crude, ordinary,
ignoble, and pointless. And don't indulge in self-mortification, which
is painful, ignoble, and pointless.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

'Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One understood the middle way
of practice, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace,
direct knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 'Avoiding these
two extremes, the Realized One understood the middle way of practice,
which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge,
awakening, and extinguishment.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'Know what it means to flatter and to rebuke. Knowing these, avoid them,
and just teach Dhamma.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?

And how is there flattering and rebuking without teaching Dhamma? 'All
those who indulge in the happiness of the pleasure linked to
sensuality---low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless---are beset by
pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are practicing the wrong way.'
In speaking like this, some here are rebuked.

'All those who have broken off indulging in the happiness of the
pleasure linked to sensuality are free of pain, harm, stress, and fever,
and they are practicing the right way.' In speaking like this, some here
are flattered.

'All those who indulge in self-mortification---painful, ignoble, and
pointless---are beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are
practicing the wrong way.' In speaking like this, some here are rebuked.

'All those who have broken off indulging in self-mortification are free
of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are practicing the right
way.' In speaking like this, some here are flattered.

'All those who have not given up the fetter of continued existence are
beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are practicing the
wrong way.' In speaking like this, some here are rebuked.

'All those who have given up the fetter of continued existence are free
of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are practicing the right
way.' In speaking like this, some here are flattered. That's how there
is flattering and rebuking without teaching Dhamma.

And how is there neither flattering nor rebuking, and just teaching
Dhamma? You don't say: 'All those who indulge in the happiness of the
pleasure linked to sensuality---low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and
pointless---are beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are
practicing the wrong way.' Rather, by saying this you just teach Dhamma:
'The indulgence is a principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever,
and it is the wrong way.'

You don't say: 'All those who have broken off indulging in the happiness
of the pleasure linked to sensuality are free of pain, harm, stress, and
fever, and they are practicing the right way.' Rather, by saying this
you just teach Dhamma: 'Breaking off the indulgence is a principle free
of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the right way.'

You don't say: 'All those who indulge in self-mortification---painful,
ignoble, and pointless---are beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and
they are practicing the wrong way.' Rather, by saying this you just
teach Dhamma: 'The indulgence is a principle beset by pain, harm,
stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way.'

You don't say: 'All those who have broken off indulging in
self-mortification are free of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they
are practicing the right way.' Rather, by saying this you just teach
Dhamma: 'Breaking off the indulgence is a principle free of pain, harm,
stress, and fever, and it is the right way.'

You don't say: 'All those who have not given up the fetter of continued
existence are beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are
practicing the wrong way.' Rather, by saying this you just teach Dhamma:
'When the fetter of continued existence is not given up, continued
existence is also not given up.'

You don't say: 'All those who have given up the fetter of continued
existence are free of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and they are
practicing the right way.' Rather, by saying this you just teach Dhamma:
'When the fetter of continued existence is given up, continued existence
is also given up.' That's how there is neither flattering nor rebuking,
and just teaching Dhamma. 'Know what it means to flatter and to rebuke.
Knowing these, avoid them, and just teach Dhamma.' That's what I said,
and this is why I said it.

'Know how to evaluate different kinds of pleasure. Knowing this, pursue
inner pleasure.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are
these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the
eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and
arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ...
Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These
are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The pleasure and happiness
that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called
sensual pleasure---a filthy, common, ignoble pleasure. Such pleasure
should not be cultivated or developed, but should be feared, I say. Now,
take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called the pleasure
of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the
pleasure of awakening. Such pleasure should be cultivated and developed,
and should not be feared, I say. 'Know how to evaluate different kinds
of pleasure. Knowing this, pursue inner pleasure.' That's what I said,
and this is why I said it.

'Don't talk behind people's backs, and don't speak sharply in their
presence.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? When you know that
what you say behind someone's back is untrue, false, and pointless, then
to the best of your ability you should not speak. When you know that
what you say behind someone's back is true and correct, but pointless,
then you should train yourself not to speak. When you know that what you
say behind someone's back is true, correct, and beneficial, then you
should know the right time to speak. When you know that your sharp words
in someone's presence are untrue, false, and pointless, then to the best
of your ability you should not speak. When you know that your sharp
words in someone's presence are true and correct, but pointless, then
you should train yourself not to speak. When you know that your sharp
words in someone's presence are true, correct, and beneficial, then you
should know the right time to speak. 'Don't talk behind people's backs,
and don't speak sharply in their presence.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

'Don't speak hurriedly.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? When
speaking hurriedly, your body gets tired, your mind gets stressed, your
voice gets stressed, your throat gets sore, and your words become
unclear and hard to understand. When not speaking hurriedly, your body
doesn't get tired, your mind doesn't get stressed, your voice doesn't
get stressed, your throat doesn't get sore, and your words are clear and
easy to understand. 'Don't speak hurriedly.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'Don't insist on popular terms and don't overstep normal labels.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? And how do you insist on popular
terms and overstep normal
labels?[2443](endnotes.xhtml_note-2443){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2443
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's when among different populations they
label the same thing as a 'pot', a 'bowl', a 'jar', a 'scoop', a
'vessel', a 'dish', or a
'plate'.[2444](endnotes.xhtml_note-2444){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2444
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And however it is known among those various
populations, you speak accordingly, obstinately sticking to that and
insisting: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' That's how
you insist on popular terms and overstep normal labels.

And how do you not insist on popular terms and overstep normal labels?
It's when among different populations they label the same thing as a
'pot', a 'bowl', a 'jar', a 'scoop', a 'vessel', a 'dish', or a 'plate'.
And however it is known among those various populations, you speak
accordingly, thinking: 'It seems that the venerables are referring to
this.' That's how you don't insist on popular terms and don't overstep
normal labels. 'Don't insist on popular terms and don't overstep normal
labels.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

Now, mendicants, indulging in the happiness of the pleasure linked to
sensuality is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It is a
principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong
way. That's why this is a principle beset by conflict. Breaking off such
indulgence is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it
is the right way. That's why this is a principle free of conflict.

Indulging in self-mortification is painful, ignoble, and pointless. It
is a principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the
wrong way. That's why this is a principle beset by conflict. Breaking
off such indulgence is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and
fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a principle free of
conflict.

The middle way of practice that was understood by the Realized One gives
vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening,
and extinguishment. It is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and
fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a principle free of
conflict.

Flattering and rebuking without teaching Dhamma is a principle beset by
pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. That's why this
is a principle beset by conflict. Neither flattering nor rebuking, and
just teaching Dhamma is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and
fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a principle free of
conflict.

Sensual pleasure---a filthy, common, ignoble pleasure---is a principle
beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. That's
why this is a principle beset by conflict. The pleasure of renunciation,
the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of
awakening is a principle free of pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it
is the right way. That's why this is a principle free of conflict.

Saying untrue, false, and pointless things behind someone's back is a
principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong
way. That's why this is a principle beset by conflict. Saying true and
correct, but pointless things behind someone's back is a principle beset
by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. That's why
this is a principle beset by conflict. Saying true, correct, and
beneficial things behind someone's back is a principle free of pain,
harm, stress, and fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a
principle free of conflict.

Saying untrue, false, and pointless things in someone's presence is a
principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong
way. That's why this is a principle beset by conflict. Saying true and
correct, but pointless things in someone's presence is a principle beset
by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. That's why
this is a principle beset by conflict. Saying true, correct, and
beneficial things in someone's presence is a principle free of pain,
harm, stress, and fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a
principle free of conflict.

Speaking hurriedly is a principle beset by pain, harm, stress, and
fever, and it is the wrong way. That's why this is a principle beset by
conflict. Speaking unhurriedly is a principle free of pain, harm,
stress, and fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a
principle free of conflict.

Insisting on popular terms and overriding common usage is a principle
beset by pain, harm, stress, and fever, and it is the wrong way. That's
why this is a principle beset by conflict. Not insisting on popular
terms and not overriding common usage is a principle free of pain, harm,
stress, and fever, and it is the right way. That's why this is a
principle free of conflict.

So you should train like this: 'We shall know the principles beset by
conflict and the principles free of conflict. Knowing this, we will
practice the way free of conflict.'

And, mendicants, Subhūti, the gentleman, practices the way of
non-conflict."[2445](endnotes.xhtml_note-2445){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2445
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn140">

### [MN 140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Analysis of the Elements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhātuvibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
Magadhan lands when he arrived at Rājagaha. He went to see Bhaggava the
potter, and
said,[2446](endnotes.xhtml_note-2446){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2446
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Bhaggava, if it is no trouble, I'd like to
spend a single night in your workshop."

"It's no trouble, sir. But there's a renunciate already staying there.
If he allows it, sir, you may stay as long as you please."

Now at that time a gentleman named Pukkusāti had gone forth out of faith
from the lay life to homelessness in the Buddha's
name.[2447](endnotes.xhtml_note-2447){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2447
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And it was he who had first taken up
residence in the workshop. Then the Buddha approached Venerable
Pukkusāti and said, "Mendicant, if it is no trouble, I'd like to spend a
single night in the
workshop."[2448](endnotes.xhtml_note-2448){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2448
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The potter's workshop is spacious, reverend. Stay as long as you
please."

Then the Buddha entered the workshop and spread out a grass mat to one
side. He sat down cross-legged, set his body straight, and established
mindfulness in his presence. He spent much of the night sitting in
meditation, and so did Pukkusāti.

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "This gentleman's behavior is
impressive.[2449](endnotes.xhtml_note-2449){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2449
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I question him?"

So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti, "In whose name have you gone forth,
mendicant? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you believe in?"

"Reverend, there is the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a
Sakyan family. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' I've gone forth
in his name. That Blessed One is my Teacher, and I believe in his
teaching."

"But mendicant, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha?"

"In the northern lands there is a city called
Sāvatthī.[2450](endnotes.xhtml_note-2450){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2450
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There the Blessed One is now staying, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha."

"But have you ever seen that Buddha? Would you recognize him if you saw
him?"

"No, I've never seen him, and I wouldn't recognize him if I
did."[2451](endnotes.xhtml_note-2451){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2451
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "This gentleman has gone forth in my
name. Why don't I teach him the
Dhamma?"[2452](endnotes.xhtml_note-2452){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2452
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti, "Mendicant, I shall teach you the
Dhamma. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," replied Pukkusāti. The Buddha said this:

"'This person has six elements, six fields of contact, eighteen mental
preoccupations, and four
foundations.[2453](endnotes.xhtml_note-2453){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2453
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Where they stand, the streams of conceiving
do not flow. And where the streams of conceiving do not flow, they are
called a sage at peace. Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster
generosity; and train only for peace.' This is the summary recital for
the analysis of the elements.

'This person has six elements.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? There are these six elements: the elements of earth, water, fire,
air, space, and
consciousness.[2454](endnotes.xhtml_note-2454){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2454
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This person has six elements.' That's what
I said, and this is why I said it.

'This person has six fields of contact.' That's what I said, but why did
I say it? The fields of contact of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind. 'This person has six fields of contact.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'This person has eighteen mental
preoccupations.'[2455](endnotes.xhtml_note-2455){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2455
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that's a
basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. Hearing a sound with the
ear ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with the
tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ... Becoming conscious of an idea with the
mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for happiness or
sadness or equanimity. So there are six preoccupations with happiness,
six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity.
'This person has eighteen mental preoccupations.' That's what I said,
and this is why I said it.

'This person has four
foundations.'[2456](endnotes.xhtml_note-2456){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2456
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?
The foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and
peace.[2457](endnotes.xhtml_note-2457){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2457
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'This person has four foundations.' That's
what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster generosity; and train
only for
peace.'[2458](endnotes.xhtml_note-2458){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2458
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?

And how does one not neglect
wisdom?[2459](endnotes.xhtml_note-2459){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2459
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There are these six
elements:[2460](endnotes.xhtml_note-2460){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2460
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the elements of earth, water, fire, air,
space, and consciousness.

And what is the earth element? The earth element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior earth element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's hard, solid, and appropriated. This
includes: head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews,
bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs,
intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, or anything else
internal, pertaining to an individual, that's hard, solid, and
appropriated. This is called the interior earth element. The interior
earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth element.
This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with
right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the earth element,
detaching the mind from the earth element.

And what is the water element? The water element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior water element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This includes: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease,
saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine, or anything else internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's water, watery, and appropriated.
This is called the interior water element. The interior water element
and the exterior water element are just the water element. This should
be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the water element, detaching
the mind from the water element.

And what is the fire element? The fire element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior fire element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's fire, fiery, and appropriated. This
includes: that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up
when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink; or anything
else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's fire, fiery, and
appropriated. This is called the interior fire element. The interior
fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element.
This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with
right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire element,
detaching the mind from the fire element.

And what is the air element? The air element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior air element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy, and appropriated. This
includes: winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels,
winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths; or
anything else internal, pertaining to an individual, that's air, airy,
and appropriated. This is called the interior air element. The interior
air element and the exterior air element are just the air element. This
should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not
mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with right
understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air element, detaching
the mind from the air element.

And what is the space element? The space element may be interior or
exterior. And what is the interior space element? Anything internal,
pertaining to an individual, that's space, spacious, and appropriated.
This includes: the ear canals, nostrils, and mouth; and the space for
swallowing what is eaten and drunk, the space where it stays, and the
space for excreting it from the nether regions; or anything else
internal, pertaining to an individual, that's space, spacious, and
appropriated. This is called the interior space element. The interior
space element and the exterior space element are just the space element.
This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly see with
right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the space element,
detaching the mind from the space
element.[2461](endnotes.xhtml_note-2461){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2461
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

What remains is sheer consciousness, pure and
bright.[2462](endnotes.xhtml_note-2462){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2462
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And what does that consciousness know? It
knows 'pleasure' and 'pain' and 'neutral'. Pleasant feeling arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as
pleasant.[2463](endnotes.xhtml_note-2463){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2463
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they feel a pleasant feeling, they
know: 'I feel a pleasant feeling.' They know: 'With the cessation of
that contact to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant
feeling ceases and stops.'

Painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as
painful.[2464](endnotes.xhtml_note-2464){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2464
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they feel a painful feeling, they
know: 'I feel a painful feeling.' They know: 'With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling
ceases and stops.'

Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as
neutral.[2465](endnotes.xhtml_note-2465){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2465
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When they feel a neutral feeling, they
know: 'I feel a neutral feeling.' They know: 'With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling
ceases and stops.'

When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is
produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any
corresponding heat ceases and
stops.[2466](endnotes.xhtml_note-2466){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2466
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, pleasant feeling arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. ...

They know: 'With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as
neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.'

There remains only equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and
radiant.[2467](endnotes.xhtml_note-2467){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2467
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's like when a deft goldsmith or a
goldsmith's apprentice prepares a forge, fires the crucible, picks up
some native gold with tongs and puts it in the crucible. From time to
time they fan it, from time to time they sprinkle water on it, and from
time to time they just watch over it. That gold becomes pliable,
workable, and radiant, not brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the
goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want,
whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden
garland.[2468](endnotes.xhtml_note-2468){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2468
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} In the same way, there remains only
equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant.

They understand: 'If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and
bright, to the dimension of infinite space, and develop my mind
accordingly, this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it,
would remain for a very long
time.[2469](endnotes.xhtml_note-2469){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2469
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure
and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness, and develop my
mind accordingly, this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping
it, would remain for a very long
time.[2470](endnotes.xhtml_note-2470){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2470
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure
and bright, to the dimension of nothingness, and develop my mind
accordingly, this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it,
would remain for a very long
time.[2471](endnotes.xhtml_note-2471){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2471
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure
and bright, to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception,
and develop my mind accordingly, this equanimity of mine, relying on
that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.'

They understand: 'If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and
bright, to the dimension of infinite space, my mind would develop
accordingly. But that is
conditioned.[2472](endnotes.xhtml_note-2472){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2472
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure
and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness ... nothingness
... neither perception nor non-perception, my mind would develop
accordingly. But that is conditioned.'

They neither make a choice nor form an intention to continue existence
or to end
existence.[2473](endnotes.xhtml_note-2473){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2473
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Because of this, they don't grasp at
anything in the world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being
anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it's impermanent,
that they're not attached to it, and that they don't take pleasure in
it.[2474](endnotes.xhtml_note-2474){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2474
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they feel a painful feeling, they
understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it, and
that they don't take pleasure in it. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it,
and that they don't take pleasure in it.

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a
painful feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they feel it detached. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they
understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of
life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.'
They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right
here.'[2475](endnotes.xhtml_note-2475){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2475
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. As the oil and
the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed. In
the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand:
'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right here.'

Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate
foundation of wisdom. For this is the ultimate noble wisdom, namely, the
knowledge of the ending of all
suffering.[2476](endnotes.xhtml_note-2476){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2476
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Their freedom, being founded on truth, is unshakable. For that which is
false has a deceptive nature, while that which is true has an
undeceptive nature---extinguishment. Therefore a mendicant thus endowed
is endowed with the ultimate foundation of truth. For this is the
ultimate noble truth, namely, that which has an undeceptive
nature---extinguishment.

In their ignorance, they used to acquire attachments. Those have been
cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so they are
unable to arise in the future. Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is
endowed with the ultimate foundation of generosity. For this is the
ultimate noble generosity, namely, letting go of all attachments.

In their ignorance, they used to be covetous, full of desire and lust.
That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated
so it's unable to arise in the future. In their ignorance, they used to
be contemptuous, full of ill will and malevolence. That has been cut off
at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it's unable to arise
in the future. In their ignorance, they used to be ignorant, full of
delusion. That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated so it's unable to arise in the future. Therefore a mendicant
thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of peace. For this
is the ultimate noble peace, namely, the pacification of greed, hate,
and delusion.

'Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster generosity; and train
only for peace.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it.[2477](endnotes.xhtml_note-2477){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2477
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

'Where they stand, the streams of conceiving do not flow. And where the
streams of conceiving do not flow, they are called a sage at
peace.'[2478](endnotes.xhtml_note-2478){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2478
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I said, but why did I say it?

These are all forms of conceiving: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I
will not be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be
percipient', 'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient
nor non-percipient.' Conceiving is a disease, a boil, a dart. Having
gone beyond all conceiving, one is called a sage at peace. The sage at
peace is not reborn, does not grow old, and does not die. They are not
shaken, and do not yearn. For they have nothing which would cause them
to be reborn. Not being reborn, how could they grow old? Not growing
old, how could they die? Not dying, how could they be shaken? Not
shaking, for what could they yearn?

'Where they stand, the streams of conceiving do not flow. And where the
streams of conceiving do not flow, they are called a sage at peace.'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it. Mendicant, you should
remember this brief analysis of the six
elements."[2479](endnotes.xhtml_note-2479){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2479
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then Venerable Pukkusāti thought, "It seems the Teacher has come to me!
The Holy One has come to me! The fully awakened Buddha has come to me!"
He got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, bowed with
his head at the Buddha's feet, and said, "I have made a mistake, sir. It
was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to presume to address the
Buddha as 'reverend'. Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so
I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, mendicant, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to act in that way. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future."

"Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's
presence?"

"But mendicant, do you have a full set of bowl and
robes?"[2480](endnotes.xhtml_note-2480){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2480
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"No, sir, I do not."

"The Realized Ones do not ordain those without a full set of bowl and
robes."

And then Venerable Pukkusāti approved and agreed with what the Buddha
said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

But while he was wandering in search of a bowl and robes, a stray cow
took his
life.[2481](endnotes.xhtml_note-2481){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2481
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, the gentleman named Pukkusāti, who was
advised in brief by the Buddha, has passed away. Where has he been
reborn in his next life?"

"Mendicants, Pukkusāti was astute. He practiced in line with the
teachings, and did not trouble me about the teachings. With the ending
of the five lower fetters, he's been reborn spontaneously and will
become extinguished there, not liable to return from that
world."[2482](endnotes.xhtml_note-2482){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2482
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn141">

### [MN 141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Analysis of the Truths ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saccavibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel
of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the
world.[2483](endnotes.xhtml_note-2483){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2483
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It is the teaching, advocating,
establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble
truths. What four?

The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.[2484](endnotes.xhtml_note-2484){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2484
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel
of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. It is the
teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing
of the four noble truths.

Mendicants, you should cultivate friendship with Sāriputta and
Moggallāna. You should associate with Sāriputta and Moggallāna. They're
astute, and they support their spiritual companions. Sāriputta is like
one who gives
birth,[2485](endnotes.xhtml_note-2485){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2485
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} while Moggallāna is like one who raises the
child.[2486](endnotes.xhtml_note-2486){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2486
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Sāriputta guides people to the fruit of
stream-entry, Moggallāna to the highest goal. Sāriputta is able to
explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal the four
noble truths in detail."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Sāriputta said to the
mendicants, "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel
of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. It is the
teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing
of the four noble truths. What four?

The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering.
In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.

And what is
rebirth?[2487](endnotes.xhtml_note-2487){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2487
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The rebirth, inception, conception,
reincarnation, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the
sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of
sentient beings. This is called rebirth.

And what is old age? The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair,
wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
old age.

And what is death? The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise,
mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest
of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
death.

And what is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner
sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who
has experienced suffering. This is called sorrow.

And what is lamentation? The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of
wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has
experienced suffering. This is called lamentation.

And what is pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This is called
pain.

And what is sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is called
sadness.

And what is distress? The stress, distress, state of stress and distress
in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.
This is called distress.

And what is 'not getting what you wish for is suffering'? In sentient
beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if only we
were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to us!' But
you can't get that by wishing. This is: 'not getting what you wish for
is suffering.' In sentient beings who are liable to grow old ... fall
ill ... die ... experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if only we were not liable to
experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress! If only
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress would not come to us!'
But you can't get that by wishing. This is: 'not getting what you wish
for is suffering.'

And what is 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering'?[2488](endnotes.xhtml_note-2488){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2488
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They are the grasping aggregates that
consist of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This
is called 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.' This
is called the noble truth of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the origin of
suffering?[2489](endnotes.xhtml_note-2489){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2489
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} It's the craving that leads to future
lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it
lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue
existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the noble truth
of the origin of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? It's the
fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left
over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to
it. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of
suffering.[2490](endnotes.xhtml_note-2490){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2490
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is called right view.

And what is right thought? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness. This is called right thought.

And what is right
speech?[2491](endnotes.xhtml_note-2491){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2491
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Refraining from lying, divisive speech,
harsh speech, and talking nonsense. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Refraining from killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct. This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called right
livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. This is called right
mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion. This is called the noble truth of the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering.

Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel
of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. It is the
teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing
of the four noble truths."

That's what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved
what Sāriputta said.

</article>
<article id="mn142">

### [MN 142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Analysis of Religious Donations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī approached the Buddha bringing a new pair of
garments. She bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha,[2492](endnotes.xhtml_note-2492){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2492
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, I have spun and woven this new pair
of garments specially for the
Buddha.[2493](endnotes.xhtml_note-2493){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2493
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} May the Buddha please accept this from me
out of sympathy."

When she said this, the Buddha said to her, "Give it to the Saṅgha,
Gotamī. When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be
honored."[2494](endnotes.xhtml_note-2494){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2494
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

For a second time ...

For a third time, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī said to the Buddha, "Sir, I have
spun and woven this new pair of garments specially for the Buddha. May
the Buddha please accept this from me out of sympathy."

And for a third time, the Buddha said to her, "Give it to the Saṅgha,
Gotamī. When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be
honored."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, please
accept the new pair of garments from Mahāpajāpati Gotamī. Sir,
Mahāpajāpati was very helpful to the Buddha. As his aunt, she raised
him, nurtured him, and gave him her milk. When the Buddha's birth mother
passed away, she nurtured him at her own breast.

And the Buddha has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpati. It is owing to the
Buddha that Mahāpajāpati has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha. It's owing to the Buddha that she refrains
from killing living creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct,
lying, and taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. It's owing to
the Buddha that she has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha, and has the ethics loved by the noble ones.
It's owing to the Buddha that she is free of doubt regarding suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation.[2495](endnotes.xhtml_note-2495){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2495
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The Buddha has been very helpful to
Mahāpajāpati."

"That's so true, Ānanda. When someone has enabled you to go for refuge,
it's not easy to repay them by bowing down to them, rising up for them,
greeting them with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for
them; or by providing them with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick.

When someone has enabled you to refrain from killing, stealing, sexual
misconduct, lying, and alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, it's not
easy to repay them ...

When someone has enabled you to have experiential confidence in the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and the ethics loved by the noble
ones, it's not easy to repay them ...

When someone has enabled you to be free of doubt regarding suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation,
it's not easy to repay them by bowing down to them, rising up for them,
greeting them with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for
them; or by providing them with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick.

Ānanda, there are these fourteen religious donations to
individuals.[2496](endnotes.xhtml_note-2496){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2496
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What fourteen? One gives a gift to the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is the
first religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift to an
independent Buddha. This is the second religious donation to an
individual. One gives a gift to a perfected one. This is the third
religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift to someone
practicing to realize the fruit of perfection. This is the fourth
religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift to a non-returner.
This is the fifth religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift
to someone practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. This is the
sixth religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift to a
once-returner. This is the seventh religious donation to an individual.
One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. This is the eighth religious donation to an individual. One
gives a gift to a stream-enterer. This is the ninth religious donation
to an individual. One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the
fruit of stream-entry. This is the tenth religious donation to an
individual. One gives a gift to an outsider who is free of desire for
sensual pleasures. This is the eleventh religious donation to an
individual. One gives a gift to an ordinary person who has good ethical
conduct. This is the twelfth religious donation to an individual. One
gives a gift to an ordinary person who has bad ethical conduct. This is
the thirteenth religious donation to an individual. One gives a gift to
an animal. This is the fourteenth religious donation to an
individual.[2497](endnotes.xhtml_note-2497){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2497
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now, Ānanda, gifts to the following persons may be expected to yield the
following returns. To an animal, a hundred times. To an unethical
ordinary person, a thousand. To an ethical ordinary person, a hundred
thousand. To an outsider free of desire for sensual pleasures,
10,000,000,000. But a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of
stream-entry may be expected to yield incalculable, immeasurable
returns. How much more so a gift to a stream-enterer, someone practicing
to realize the fruit of once-return, a once-returner, someone practicing
to realize the fruit of non-return, a non-returner, someone practicing
to realize the fruit of perfection, a perfected one, or an independent
Buddha? How much more so a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully
awakened
Buddha?[2498](endnotes.xhtml_note-2498){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2498
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

But there are, Ānanda, seven religious donations bestowed on a Saṅgha.
What seven? One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns
headed by the Buddha. This is the first religious donation bestowed on a
Saṅgha. One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns after
the Buddha has finally become
quenched.[2499](endnotes.xhtml_note-2499){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2499
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the second religious donation
bestowed on a Saṅgha. One gives a gift to the Saṅgha of monks. This is
the third religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. One gives a gift to
the Saṅgha of
nuns.[2500](endnotes.xhtml_note-2500){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2500
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} This is the fourth religious donation
bestowed on a Saṅgha. One gives a gift, thinking: 'Appoint this many
monks and nuns for me from the Saṅgha.' This is the fifth religious
donation bestowed on a Saṅgha. One gives a gift, thinking: 'Appoint this
many monks for me from the Saṅgha.' This is the sixth religious donation
bestowed on a Saṅgha. One gives a gift, thinking: 'Appoint this many
nuns for me from the Saṅgha.' This is the seventh religious donation
bestowed on a Saṅgha.

In times to come there will be lambs of the flock wearing a scrap of
ocher cloth, unethical and of bad
character.[2501](endnotes.xhtml_note-2501){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2501
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} People will give gifts to those unethical
people in the name of the Saṅgha. Even then, I say, a religious donation
bestowed on the Saṅgha is incalculable and
immeasurable.[2502](endnotes.xhtml_note-2502){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2502
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But I say that there is no way a personal
offering can be more fruitful than one bestowed on a Saṅgha.

Ānanda, there are these four ways of purifying a religious
donation.[2503](endnotes.xhtml_note-2503){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2503
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What four? There's a religious donation
that's purified by the giver, not the recipient. There's a religious
donation that's purified by the recipient, not the giver. There's a
religious donation that's purified by neither the giver nor the
recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified by both the
giver and the recipient.

And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the
recipient? It's when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the
recipient is unethical, of bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the
giver? It's when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the
recipient is ethical, of good character.

And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of
bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of
good character. These are the four ways of purifying a religious
donation."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:[2504](endnotes.xhtml_note-2504){#mn-vibhangavagga.xhtml_noteref-2504
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

> "When an ethical person with trusting heart\
> gives a proper gift to unethical persons,\
> trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,\
> that offering is purified by the giver.
>
> When an unethical and untrusting person,\
> gives an improper gift to ethical persons,\
> not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,\
> that offering is purified by the receivers.
>
> When an unethical and untrusting person,\
> gives an improper gift to unethical persons,\
> not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,\
> I declare that gift is not very fruitful.
>
> When an ethical person with trusting heart\
> gives a proper gift to ethical persons,\
> trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,\
> I declare that gift is abundantly fruitful.
>
> But when a passionless one gives to the passionless\
> a proper gift with trusting heart,\
> trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,\
> that's truly the best of material gifts."

</article>

[]{#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on the Six Senses {#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_mn-salayatanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="mn143">

### [MN 143]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice to Anāthapiṇḍika ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anāthapiṇḍikovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍika was sick, suffering,
gravely
ill.[2505](endnotes.xhtml_note-2505){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2505
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Then he addressed a man, "Please, mister,
go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to
him: 'Sir, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is sick, suffering, gravely
ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' Then go to Venerable
Sāriputta, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him:
'Sir, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is sick, suffering, gravely ill. He
bows with his head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please visit him
at his home out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Anāthapiṇḍika asked. Sāriputta
consented with silence.

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, went with Venerable Ānanda as his second monk to
Anāthapiṇḍika's home. He sat down on the seat spread out, and said to
Anāthapiṇḍika, "I hope you're keeping well, householder; I hope you're
all right. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading
is evident, not its
growing."[2506](endnotes.xhtml_note-2506){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2506
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"I'm not keeping well, Honorable Sāriputta, I'm not getting by. The pain
is terrible and growing, not fading, its growing, not its fading, is
evident. The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a
strong man drilling into my head with a sharp point. The pain in my head
is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a tough leather
strap around my head. The winds slicing my belly are so severe, like a
deft butcher or their apprentice were slicing open a cows's belly with a
sharp meat cleaver. The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like
two strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him
on a pit of glowing coals. That's how severe the burning is in my body.
I'm not keeping well, Honorable Sāriputta, I'm not getting by. The pain
is terrible and growing, not fading, its growing, not its fading, is
evident."

"That's why, householder, you should train like this: 'I shall not grasp
the eye, and there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on the
eye.'[2507](endnotes.xhtml_note-2507){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2507
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp the ear, and there shall
be no consciousness of mine dependent on the ear.' ...

'I shall not grasp the nose, and there shall be no consciousness of mine
dependent on the nose.' ...

'I shall not grasp the tongue, and there shall be no consciousness of
mine dependent on the tongue.' ...

'I shall not grasp the body, and there shall be no consciousness of mine
dependent on the body.' ...

'I shall not grasp the mind, and there shall be no consciousness of mine
dependent on the mind.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp sight, and there shall be
no consciousness of mine dependent on sight.' ... 'I shall not grasp
sound ... smell ... taste ... touch ... idea, and there shall be no
consciousness of mine dependent on idea.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp eye consciousness, and
there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on eye consciousness.'
... 'I shall not grasp ear consciousness ... nose consciousness ...
tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness, and
there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on mind
consciousness.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp eye contact ... ear
contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact ... body contact ... mind
contact, and there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on mind
contact.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp feeling born of eye
contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling born of nose contact
... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born of body contact ...
feeling born of mind contact, and there shall be no consciousness of
mine dependent on the feeling born of mind contact.' That's how you
should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp the earth element ...
water element ... fire element ... air element ... space element ...
consciousness element, and there shall be no consciousness of mine
dependent on the consciousness element.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp form ... feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, and there shall be no
consciousness of mine dependent on consciousness.' That's how you should
train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp the dimension of infinite
space ... the dimension of infinite consciousness ... the dimension of
nothingness ... the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception,
and there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception.' That's how you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp this world, and there
shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on this world.' That's how
you should train.

You should train like this: 'I shall not grasp the other world, and
there shall be no consciousness of mine dependent on the other world.'
That's how you should train. You should train like this: 'I shall not
grasp whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by my mind, and my consciousness will not have that as
support.' That's how you should train."

When he said this, Anāthapiṇḍika cried and burst out in tears. Venerable
Ānanda said to him, "Are you failing, householder? Are you fading,
householder?"

"No, Honorable Ānanda. But for a long time I have paid homage to the
Buddha and the esteemed mendicants. Yet I have never before heard such a
Dhamma talk."

"Householder, such Dhamma talk does not strike when teaching
white-clothed
laypeople.[2508](endnotes.xhtml_note-2508){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2508
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, it strikes when teaching those gone
forth."

"Well then, Honorable Sāriputta, let such Dhamma talk strike when
teaching white-clothed laypeople as well! There are gentlemen with
little dust in their eyes. They're in decline because they haven't heard
the teaching. There will be those who understand the teaching!"

And when the venerables Sāriputta and Ānanda had given the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika this advice they got up from their seat and left. Not long
after they had left, Anāthapiṇḍika passed away and was reborn in the
host of joyful gods.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Anāthapiṇḍika, lighting up the
entire Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and addressed the Buddha in verse:

> "This is indeed that Jeta's Grove,\
> frequented by the Saṅgha of seers,\
> where the King of Dhamma stayed:\
> it brings me joy!
>
> Deeds, knowledge, and principle;\
> ethical conduct, an excellent livelihood;\
> by these are mortals purified,\
> not by clan or wealth.
>
> That's why an astute person,\
> seeing what's good for themselves,\
> would examine the teaching rationally,\
> and thus be purified in it.
>
> Sāriputta is full of wisdom,\
> ethics, and peace.\
> Even a mendicant who has crossed over\
> might at best equal him."

This is what the god Anāthapiṇḍika said, and the teacher approved. Then
the god Anāthapiṇḍika, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened.

When he had spoken, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, that god must surely have been Anāthapiṇḍika. For the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika was devoted to Venerable Sāriputta."

"Good, good, Ānanda. You've reached the logical conclusion, as far as
logic goes. For that was indeed the god Anāthapiṇḍika."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn144">

### [MN 144]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice to Channa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Channovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2509](endnotes.xhtml_note-2509){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2509
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time the venerables Sāriputta, Mahācunda, and Channa were
staying on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.[2510](endnotes.xhtml_note-2510){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2510
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Now at that time Venerable Channa was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat,
went to Venerable Mahācunda and said to him, "Come, Reverend Cunda,
let's go to see Venerable Channa and ask about his illness."

"Yes, reverend," replied Mahācunda.

And then Sāriputta and Mahācunda went to see Channa and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, they sat down to one side. Then Sāriputta said to Channa, "I hope
you're keeping well, Reverend Channa; I hope you're all right. I hope
that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not
its growing."

"Reverend Sāriputta, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain
is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its
fading. The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong
man drilling into my head with a sharp point. The pain in my head is so
severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a tough leather strap
around my head. The winds slicing my belly are so severe, like a deft
butcher or their apprentice were slicing open a cows's belly with a
sharp meat cleaver. The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like
two strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him
on a pit of glowing coals. I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The
pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not
its fading. Reverend Sāriputta, I will slit my wrists. I don't wish to
live."

"Please don't slit your wrists! Venerable Channa, keep going! We want
you to keep going. If you don't have any suitable food, we'll find it
for you. If you don't have suitable medicine, we'll find it for you. If
you don't have a capable carer, we'll find one for you. Please don't
slit your wrists! Venerable Channa, keep going! We want you to keep
going."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's not that I don't have suitable food, or
suitable medicine, or a capable carer. Moreover, for a long time now I
have served the Teacher with love, not without love. For it is proper
for a disciple to serve the Teacher with love, not without love. You
should remember this: 'The mendicant Channa will take his life
blamelessly.'"

"I'd like to ask you about a certain point, if you'd take the time to
answer."

"Ask, Reverend Sāriputta. When I've heard it I'll know."

"Reverend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye consciousness, and things
knowable by eye consciousness in this way: 'This is mine, I am this,
this is my self'? Do you regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness in
this way: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, I regard the eye, eye consciousness, and things
knowable by eye consciousness in this way: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' I regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind
consciousness in this way: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self'."

"Reverend Channa, what have you seen, what have you directly known in
these things that you regard them in this way: 'This is not mine, I am
not this, this is not my self'?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, after seeing cessation, after directly knowing
cessation in these things I regard them in this way: 'This is not mine,
I am not this, this is not my self'."

When he said this, Venerable Mahācunda said to Venerable Channa:

"So, Reverend Channa, you should regularly apply your mind to this
instruction of the
Buddha:[2511](endnotes.xhtml_note-2511){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2511
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'For the dependent there is agitation. For
the independent there's no
agitation.[2512](endnotes.xhtml_note-2512){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2512
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When there's no agitation there is
tranquility. When there is tranquility there's no
inclination.[2513](endnotes.xhtml_note-2513){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2513
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When there's no inclination there's no
coming and going. When there's no coming and going there's no passing
away and reappearing. When there's no passing away and reappearing
there's no this world or world beyond or between the
two.[2514](endnotes.xhtml_note-2514){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2514
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Just this is the end of suffering.'" And
when the venerables Sāriputta and Mahācunda had given Venerable Channa
this advice they got up from their seat and left.

Not long after those venerables had left, Venerable Channa took his
life.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, Venerable Channa has taken his life. Where has he
been reborn in his next life?"

"Sāriputta, didn't the mendicant Channa declare his blamelessness to you
personally?"

"Sir, there is a Vajjian village named
Pubbajira.[2515](endnotes.xhtml_note-2515){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2515
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} There Channa had families who were
friendly, intimate, and
hospitable."[2516](endnotes.xhtml_note-2516){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2516
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The mendicant Channa did indeed have such families. But this is not
enough for me to call someone 'blameworthy'. When someone lays down this
body and takes up another body, I call them 'blameworthy'. But the
mendicant Channa did no such
thing.[2517](endnotes.xhtml_note-2517){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2517
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} You should remember this: 'The mendicant
Channa took his life
blamelessly.'"[2518](endnotes.xhtml_note-2518){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2518
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Sāriputta approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn145">

### [MN 145]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice to Puṇṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puṇṇovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2519](endnotes.xhtml_note-2519){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2519
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Puṇṇa came out of retreat and went
to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha,[2520](endnotes.xhtml_note-2520){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2520
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma
in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent,
keen, and resolute."

"Well then, Puṇṇa, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Puṇṇa. The Buddha said this:

"Puṇṇa, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves,
welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing.
Relishing is the origin of suffering, I say.

There are sounds known by the ear ... smells known by the nose ...
tastes known by the tongue ... touches known by the body ... ideas known
by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, this gives rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin of
suffering, I say.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say.

There are sounds known by the ear ... smells known by the nose ...
tastes known by the tongue ... touches known by the body ... ideas known
by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, relishing ceases. When relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I
say.

Puṇṇa, now that I've given you this brief advice, what country will you
live in?"

"Sir, there's a country named Sunāparanta. I shall live
there."[2521](endnotes.xhtml_note-2521){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2521
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"The people of Sunāparanta are wild and rough, Puṇṇa. If they abuse and
insult you, what will you think of them?"

"If they abuse and insult me, I will think: 'These people of Sunāparanta
are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't hit me with their fists.'
That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do hit you with their fists, what will you think of them
then?"

"If they hit me with their fists, I'll think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't throw stones
at me.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think,
Holy One."

"But if they do throw stones at you, what will you think of them then?"

"If they throw stones at me, I'll think: 'These people of Sunāparanta
are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't beat me with a club.'
That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do beat you with a club, what will you think of them then?"

"If they beat me with a club, I'll think: 'These people of Sunāparanta
are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't stab me with a knife.'
That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do stab you with a knife, what will you think of them
then?"

"If they stab me with a knife, I'll think: 'These people of Sunāparanta
are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't take my life with a sharp
knife.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think,
Holy One."

"But if they do take your life with a sharp knife, what will you think
of them then?"

"If they take my life with a sharp knife, I'll think: 'There are
disciples of the Buddha who looked for something to take their life
because they were horrified, repelled, and disgusted with the body and
with life. And I have found this without
looking!'[2522](endnotes.xhtml_note-2522){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2522
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's
what I'll think, Holy One."

"Good, good Puṇṇa! Having such self-control and peacefulness, you will
be quite capable of living in Sunāparanta. Now, Puṇṇa, go at your
convenience."

And then Puṇṇa welcomed and agreed with the Buddha's words. He got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right. Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and
robe, set out for Sunāparanta. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at
Sunāparanta, and stayed there. Within that rainy season he confirmed
around five hundred male and five hundred female lay followers. And
within that same rainy season he realized the three knowledges. Some
time later he became fully
quenched.[2523](endnotes.xhtml_note-2523){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2523
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, the gentleman named Puṇṇa, who was advised
in brief by the Buddha, has passed away. Where has he been reborn in his
next life?"

"Mendicants, Puṇṇa was astute. He practiced in line with the teachings,
and did not trouble me about the teachings. Puṇṇa has become fully
quenched."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn146">

### [MN 146]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Advice from Nandaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nandakovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2524](endnotes.xhtml_note-2524){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2524
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī together with around five hundred nuns
approached the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to
him,[2525](endnotes.xhtml_note-2525){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2525
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Sir, may the Buddha please advise and
instruct the nuns. Please give the nuns a Dhamma talk."

Now at that time the senior monks were taking turns to advise the
nuns.[2526](endnotes.xhtml_note-2526){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2526
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But Venerable Nandaka didn't want to take
his
turn.[2527](endnotes.xhtml_note-2527){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2527
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, whose turn is it to
advise the nuns today?"

"It's Nandaka's turn, sir, but he doesn't want to do it."

Then the Buddha said to Nandaka, "Nandaka, please advise and instruct
the nuns. Please, brahmin, give the nuns a Dhamma talk."

"Yes, sir," replied Nandaka. Then, in the morning, he robed up and,
taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. He wandered for
alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went
to the Royal Monastery with a
companion.[2528](endnotes.xhtml_note-2528){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2528
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Those nuns saw him coming off in the
distance, so they spread out a seat and placed water for washing the
feet. Nandaka sat down on the seat spread out, and washed his feet.
Those nuns bowed, and sat down to one side.

Nandaka said to them, "Sisters, this talk shall be in the form of
questions. When you understand, say so. When you don't understand, say
so. If anyone has a doubt or uncertainty, ask me about it: 'Why, sir,
does it say this? What does that
mean?'"[2529](endnotes.xhtml_note-2529){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2529
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"We're already delighted and satisfied with Master Nandaka, since he
invites us like
this."[2530](endnotes.xhtml_note-2530){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2530
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"What do you think, sisters? Is the eye permanent or
impermanent?"[2531](endnotes.xhtml_note-2531){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2531
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, sisters? Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because we have already truly seen this with
right wisdom: 'So these six interior sense fields are
impermanent.'"[2532](endnotes.xhtml_note-2532){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2532
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, good, sisters! That's how it is for a noble disciple who truly
sees with right wisdom.

What do you think, sisters? Are sights permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, are they suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, suffering, and perishable, are they fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, sisters? Are sounds ... smells ... tastes ...
touches ... ideas permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, are they suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, suffering, and perishable, are they fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because we have already truly seen this with
right wisdom: 'So these six exterior sense fields are impermanent.'"

"Good, good, sisters! That's how it is for a noble disciple who truly
sees with right wisdom.

What do you think, sisters? Is eye consciousness ... ear consciousness
... nose consciousness ... tongue consciousness ... body consciousness
... mind consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because we have already truly seen this with
right wisdom: 'So these six classes of consciousness are impermanent.'"

"Good, good, sisters! That's how it is for a noble disciple who truly
sees with right wisdom.

Suppose there was an oil lamp burning. The oil, wick, flame, and light
were all impermanent and
perishable.[2533](endnotes.xhtml_note-2533){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2533
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, suppose someone was to say: 'While
this oil lamp is burning, the oil, the wick, and the flame are all
impermanent and perishable. But the light is permanent, lasting,
eternal, and imperishable.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because that oil lamp's oil, wick, and flame are
all impermanent and perishable, let alone the
light."[2534](endnotes.xhtml_note-2534){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2534
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In the same way, suppose someone was to say: 'These six interior sense
fields are impermanent. But the feeling---whether pleasant, painful, or
neutral---that I experience due to these six interior sense fields is
permanent, lasting, eternal, and imperishable.' Would they be speaking
rightly?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because each kind of feeling arises dependent on
the corresponding condition. When the corresponding condition ceases,
the appropriate feeling ceases."

"Good, good, sisters! That's how it is for a noble disciple who truly
sees with right wisdom.

Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. The roots,
trunk, branches and leaves, and shadow were all impermanent and
perishable.[2535](endnotes.xhtml_note-2535){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2535
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Now, suppose someone was to say: 'There's a
large tree standing with heartwood. The roots, trunk, and branches and
leaves are all impermanent and perishable. But the shadow is permanent,
lasting, eternal, and imperishable.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because that large tree's roots, trunk, and
branches and leaves are all impermanent and perishable, let alone the
shadow."[2536](endnotes.xhtml_note-2536){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2536
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"In the same way, suppose someone was to say: 'These six exterior sense
fields are
impermanent.[2537](endnotes.xhtml_note-2537){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2537
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} But the feeling---whether pleasant,
painful, or neutral---that I experience due to these six exterior sense
fields is permanent, lasting, eternal, and imperishable.' Would they be
speaking rightly?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because each kind of feeling arises dependent on
the corresponding condition. When the corresponding condition ceases,
the appropriate feeling ceases."

"Good, good, sisters! That's how it is for a noble disciple who truly
sees with right wisdom.

Suppose a deft butcher or their apprentice was to kill a cow and carve
it with a sharp meat cleaver. Without damaging the flesh inside or the
hide
outside,[2538](endnotes.xhtml_note-2538){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2538
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} they'd cut, carve, sever, and slice through
the connecting tendons, sinews, and ligaments with a sharp meat
cleaver,[2539](endnotes.xhtml_note-2539){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2539
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} and then peel off the outer hide. Then
they'd wrap that cow up in that very same hide and say: 'This cow is
joined to its hide just like before.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because even if they wrap that cow up in that
very same hide and say: 'This cow is joined to its hide just like
before,' still that cow is not joined to that hide."

"I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is the point. 'The
inner flesh' is a term for the six interior sense fields. 'The outer
hide' is a term for the six exterior sense fields. 'The connecting
tendons, sinews, and ligaments' is a term for greed and relishing. 'A
sharp meat cleaver' is a term for noble wisdom. And it is that noble
wisdom which cuts, carves, severs, and slices the connecting corruption,
fetter, and bond.

Sisters, by developing and cultivating these seven awakening factors, a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of
defilements.[2540](endnotes.xhtml_note-2540){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2540
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What seven? It's when a mendicant develops
the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. It is by
developing and cultivating these seven awakening factors that a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

Then after giving this advice to the nuns, Nandaka dismissed them,
saying, "Go, sisters, it is
time."[2541](endnotes.xhtml_note-2541){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2541
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And then those nuns approved and agreed with what Nandaka had said. They
got up from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled him, keeping him
on their right. Then they went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one
side. The Buddha said to them, "Go, nuns, it is time."

Then those nuns bowed to the Buddha respectfully circled him, keeping
him on their right, before departing.

Soon after those nuns had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Suppose, mendicants, it was the sabbath of the fourteenth day. You
wouldn't get lots of people wondering whether the moon is full or not,
since it is obviously not full.

In the same way, those nuns were uplifted by Nandaka's Dhamma teaching,
but they still haven't got all they wished for."

Then the Buddha said to Nandaka, "Well then, Nandaka, tomorrow you
should give those nuns the same advice again."

"Yes, sir," Nandaka replied. And the next day he went to those nuns, and
all unfolded just like the previous day.

Soon after those nuns had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Suppose, mendicants, it was the sabbath of the fifteenth day. You
wouldn't get lots of people wondering whether the moon is full or not,
since it is obviously full. In the same way, those nuns were uplifted by
Nandaka's Dhamma teaching, and they got all they wished for. Even the
last of these five hundred nuns is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."[2542](endnotes.xhtml_note-2542){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2542
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn147">

### [MN 147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shorter Advice to Rāhula ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷarāhulovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2543](endnotes.xhtml_note-2543){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2543
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "The
qualities that ripen in freedom have ripened in
Rāhula.[2544](endnotes.xhtml_note-2544){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2544
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why don't I lead him further to the ending
of defilements?"

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms.

Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, he addressed
Venerable Rāhula, "Rāhula, get your sitting
cloth.[2545](endnotes.xhtml_note-2545){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2545
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Let's go to the Dark Forest for the day's
meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Rāhula. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Now at that time many thousands of deities followed the Buddha,
thinking,[2546](endnotes.xhtml_note-2546){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2546
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} "Today the Buddha will lead Rāhula further
to the ending of defilements!"

Then the Buddha plunged deep into the Dark Forest and sat at the root of
a tree on the seat spread out. Rāhula bowed to the Buddha and sat down
to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Are sights permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, are they suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, suffering, and perishable, are they fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is eye consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is eye contact permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Anything included in feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness that arises conditioned by eye contact: is
that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Are ideas permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, are they suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if they\'re impermanent, suffering, and perishable, are they fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is mind consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is mind contact permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Rāhula? Anything included in feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness that arises conditioned by mind contact: is
that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with anything included in feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness that arises conditioned by eye contact. They grow
disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, ideas,
mind consciousness, and mind contact. And they grow disillusioned with
anything included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness
that arises conditioned by mind contact. Being disillusioned, desire
fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Rāhula approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, Rāhula's
mind was freed from defilements by not grasping.

And the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in those
thousands of deities: "Everything that has a beginning has an end."

</article>
<article id="mn148">

### [MN 148]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Six By Six ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chachakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I shall teach you the Dhamma that's good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased.
And I shall reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure,
namely,[2547](endnotes.xhtml_note-2547){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2547
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the six sets of six. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"The six interior sense fields should be understood. The six exterior
sense fields should be understood. The six classes of consciousness
should be understood. The six classes of contact should be understood.
The six classes of feeling should be understood. The six classes of
craving should be understood.

'The six interior sense fields should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? There are the sense fields of the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. 'The six interior sense fields should be
understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it. This is the
first set of six.

'The six exterior sense fields should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? There are the sense fields of sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. 'The six exterior sense
fields should be understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it. This is the second set of six.

'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the
eye and sights. Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and
sounds. Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells.
Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. Body
consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. Mind
consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. 'The six classes
of consciousness should be understood.' That's what I said, and this is
why I said it. This is the third set of six.

'The six classes of contact should be understood.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and
sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Ear consciousness arises
dependent on the ear and sounds. The meeting of the three is contact.
Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. The meeting
of the three is contact. Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the
tongue and tastes. The meeting of the three is contact. Body
consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. The meeting of
the three is contact. Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind
and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. 'The six classes of
contact should be understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it. This is the fourth set of six.

'The six classes of feeling should be understood.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and
sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for
feeling. Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. The
meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.
Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Tongue
consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Body
consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Mind
consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the
three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. 'The six classes
of feeling should be understood.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it. This is the fifth set of six.

'The six classes of craving should be understood.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and
sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for
feeling. Feeling is a condition for
craving.[2548](endnotes.xhtml_note-2548){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2548
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Ear consciousness ... Nose consciousness
... Tongue consciousness ... Body consciousness ... Mind consciousness
arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is
contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for
craving. 'The six classes of craving should be understood.' That's what
I said, and this is why I said it. This is the sixth set of six.

If anyone says, 'the eye is self,' that is not
tenable.[2549](endnotes.xhtml_note-2549){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2549
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The arising and vanishing of the eye is
evident, so it would follow that one's self arises and vanishes. That's
why it's not tenable to claim that the eye is self. So the eye is not
self.

If anyone says, 'sights are self,' that is not tenable. The arising and
vanishing of sights is evident, so it would follow that one's self
arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable to claim that sights
are self. So the eye is not self and sights are not self.

If anyone says, 'eye consciousness is self,' that is not tenable. The
arising and vanishing of eye consciousness is evident, so it would
follow that one's self arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable
to claim that eye consciousness is self. So the eye, sights, and eye
consciousness are not self.

If anyone says, 'eye contact is self,' that is not tenable. The arising
and vanishing of eye contact is evident, so it would follow that one's
self arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable to claim that eye
contact is self. So the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact
are not self.

If anyone says, 'feeling is self,' that is not tenable. The arising and
vanishing of feeling is evident, so it would follow that one's self
arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable to claim that feeling
is self. So the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling
are not self.

If anyone says, 'craving is self,' that is not tenable. The arising and
vanishing of craving is evident, so it would follow that one's self
arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable to claim that craving
is self. So the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, feeling,
and craving are not self.

If anyone says, 'the ear is self' ... 'the nose is self' ... 'the tongue
is self' ... 'the body is self' ... 'the mind is self,' that is not
tenable. The arising and vanishing of the mind is evident, so it would
follow that one's self arises and vanishes. That's why it's not tenable
to claim that the mind is self. So the mind is not self.

If anyone says, 'ideas are self' ... 'mind consciousness is self' ...
'mind contact is self' ... 'feeling is self' ... 'craving is self,' that
is not tenable. The arising and vanishing of craving is evident, so it
would follow that one's self arises and vanishes. That's why it's not
tenable to claim that craving is self. So the mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, mind contact, feeling, and craving are not self.

Now, mendicants, this is the way that leads to the origin of substantial
reality. You regard the eye like this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is
my self.'

You regard sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ... feeling ...
craving like this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self.' You
regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... ideas ... mind
consciousness ... mind contact ... feeling ... craving like this: 'This
is mine, I am this, this is my self.'

But this is the way that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.
You regard the eye like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

You regard sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ... feeling ...
craving like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' You regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind like
this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' You regard
ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact ... feeling ... craving
like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for the arising of what is
felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. When you experience a pleasant
feeling, if you approve, welcome, and keep clinging to
it,[2550](endnotes.xhtml_note-2550){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2550
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} the underlying tendency to greed underlies
that. When you experience a painful feeling, if you sorrow and wail and
lament, beating your breast and falling into confusion, the underlying
tendency to repulsion underlies that. When you experience a neutral
feeling, if you don't truly understand that feeling's origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape, the underlying tendency to
ignorance underlies that. Mendicants, without giving up the underlying
tendency to greed for pleasant feeling, without dispelling the
underlying tendency to repulsion towards painful feeling, without
eradicating ignorance in the case of neutral feeling, without giving up
ignorance and without giving rise to knowledge, it is quite impossible
to make an end of suffering in the present life.

Ear consciousness ... Nose consciousness ... Tongue consciousness ...
Body consciousness ... Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind
and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition
for the arising of what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. When
you experience a pleasant feeling, if you approve, welcome, and keep
clinging to it, the underlying tendency to greed underlies that. When
you experience a painful feeling, if you sorrow and wail and lament,
beating your breast and falling into confusion, the underlying tendency
to repulsion underlies that. When you experience a neutral feeling, if
you don't truly understand that feeling's origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape, the underlying tendency to ignorance underlies
that. Mendicants, without giving up the underlying tendency to greed for
pleasant feeling, without dispelling the underlying tendency to
repulsion towards painful feeling, without eradicating ignorance in the
case of neutral feeling, without giving up ignorance and without giving
rise to knowledge, it is quite impossible to make an end of suffering in
the present life.

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for the arising of what is
felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. When you experience a pleasant
feeling, if you don't approve, welcome, and keep clinging to it, the
underlying tendency to greed does not underlie that. When you experience
a painful feeling, if you don't sorrow or wail or lament, beating your
breast and falling into confusion, the underlying tendency to repulsion
does not underlie that. When you experience a neutral feeling, if you
truly understand that feeling's origin, ending, gratification, drawback,
and escape, the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that.
Mendicants, after giving up the underlying tendency to greed for
pleasant feeling, after dispelling the underlying tendency to repulsion
towards painful feeling, after eradicating ignorance in the case of
neutral feeling, after giving up ignorance and giving rise to knowledge,
it's quite possible to make an end of suffering in the present life.

Ear consciousness ...

Nose consciousness ...

Tongue consciousness ...

Body consciousness ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for what is felt as
pleasant, painful, or neutral. When you experience a pleasant feeling,
if you don't approve, welcome, and keep clinging to it, the underlying
tendency to greed does not underlie that. When you experience a painful
feeling, if you don't sorrow or wail or lament, beating your breast and
falling into confusion, the underlying tendency to repulsion does not
underlie that. When you experience a neutral feeling, if you truly
understand that feeling's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape, the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that.
Mendicants, after giving up the underlying tendency to greed for
pleasant feeling, after dispelling the underlying tendency to repulsion
towards painful feeling, after eradicating ignorance in the case of
neutral feeling, after giving up ignorance and giving rise to knowledge,
it's quite possible to make an end of suffering in the present life.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, feeling, and craving.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, feeling, and craving.
Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When it is freed, they know it is freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of
sixty mendicants were freed from defilements by not
grasping.[2551](endnotes.xhtml_note-2551){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2551
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="mn149">

### [MN 149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Discourse on What Relates to the Six Sense Fields ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsaḷāyatanikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have
heard.[2552](endnotes.xhtml_note-2552){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2552
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I shall teach you the great discourse on what relates to
the six sense
fields.[2553](endnotes.xhtml_note-2553){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2553
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when you don't truly know and see the eye, sights, eye
consciousness, eye contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or
neutral that arises conditioned by eye contact, you're aroused by these
things.

Someone who lives aroused like this---fettered, confused, concentrating
on gratification---accumulates the five grasping aggregates for
themselves in the
future.[2554](endnotes.xhtml_note-2554){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2554
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} And their craving---which leads to future
lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it
lands---grows.[2555](endnotes.xhtml_note-2555){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2555
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Their physical and mental stress, torment,
and fever grow. And they experience physical and mental suffering.

When you don't truly know and see the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and what is felt as
pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises conditioned by mind contact,
you're aroused by these things.

Someone who lives aroused like this---fettered, confused, concentrating
on gratification---accumulates the five grasping aggregates for
themselves in the future. And their craving---which leads to future
lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it
lands---grows. Their physical and mental stress, torment, and fever
grow. And they experience physical and mental suffering.

When you do truly know and see the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye
contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises
conditioned by eye contact, you're not aroused by these things.

Someone who lives unaroused like this---unfettered, unconfused,
concentrating on drawbacks---disperses the five grasping aggregates for
themselves in the future. And their craving---which leads to future
lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it
lands---is given up. Their physical and mental stress, torment, and
fever are given up. And they experience physical and mental pleasure.

The view of such a person is right view. Their intention is right
intention, their effort is right effort, their mindfulness is right
mindfulness, and their immersion is right immersion. And their actions
of body and speech, and their livelihood, have already been fully
purified before. So this noble eightfold path is fully developed.

When the noble eightfold path is developed, the following are fully
developed: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five
powers, and the seven awakening
factors.[2556](endnotes.xhtml_note-2556){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2556
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And these two qualities proceed in conjunction: serenity and
discernment.[2557](endnotes.xhtml_note-2557){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2557
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They completely understand by direct
knowledge those things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge.[2558](endnotes.xhtml_note-2558){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2558
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} They give up by direct knowledge those
things that should be given up by direct knowledge. They develop by
direct knowledge those things that should be developed by direct
knowledge. They realize by direct knowledge those things that should be
realized by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge? You should say: 'The five grasping aggregates.' That is:
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These are the
things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for continued existence. These are the things that
should be given up by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge?
Serenity and discernment. These are the things that should be developed
by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge?
Knowledge and freedom. These are the things that should be realized by
direct knowledge.

When you truly know and see the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and what is felt as
pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises conditioned by mind contact,
you are not aroused by these things. ...

These are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn150">

### [MN 150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the People of Nagaravinda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nagaravindeyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Nagaravinda.[2559](endnotes.xhtml_note-2559){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2559
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

The brahmins and householders of Nagaravinda heard, "It seems the
ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family---while
wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Nagaravinda,
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Nagaravinda went up to the Buddha.
Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings
and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the
Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The
Buddha said to them:

"Householders, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask
you:[2560](endnotes.xhtml_note-2560){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2560
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'What kind of ascetic or brahmin doesn't
deserve honor, respect, reverence, and veneration?' You should answer
them: 'There are ascetics and brahmins who are not free of greed, hate,
and delusion for sights known by the eye, who are not peaceful inside,
and who conduct themselves badly among the good by way of body, speech,
and mind. They don't deserve honor, respect, reverence, and
veneration.[2561](endnotes.xhtml_note-2561){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2561
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Why is that? Because we ourselves are not
free of these things, so we do not see that they have any higher good
conduct than us. That's why they don't deserve honor, respect,
reverence, and veneration. There are ascetics and brahmins who are not
free of greed, hate, and delusion for sounds known by the ear ... smells
known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue... touches known by the
body ... ideas known by the mind, who are not peaceful inside, and who
conduct themselves badly among the good by way of body, speech, and
mind. They don't deserve honor, respect, reverence, and veneration. Why
is that? Because we ourselves are not free of these things, so we do not
see that they have any higher good conduct than us. That's why they
don't deserve honor, respect, reverence, and
veneration.'[2562](endnotes.xhtml_note-2562){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2562
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When questioned by wanderers of other
religions, that's how you should answer them.

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'What kind of ascetic
or brahmin deserves honor, respect, reverence, and veneration?' You
should answer them: 'There are ascetics and brahmins who are free of
greed, hate, and delusion for sights known by the eye, who are peaceful
inside, and who conduct themselves well by way of body, speech, and
mind. They deserve honor, respect, reverence, and veneration. Why is
that? Because we ourselves are not free of these things, but we see that
they have a higher good conduct than us. That's why they deserve honor,
respect, reverence, and veneration. There are ascetics and brahmins who
are free of greed, hate, and delusion for sounds known by the ear ...
smells known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches
known by the body ... ideas known by the mind, who are peaceful inside,
and who conduct themselves well by way of body, speech, and mind. They
deserve honor, respect, reverence, and veneration. Why is that? Because
we ourselves are not free of these things, but we see that they have a
higher good conduct than us. That's why they deserve honor, respect,
reverence, and veneration. When questioned by wanderers of other
religions, that's how you should answer them.

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'But what reasons and
evidence do you have regarding those venerables that justifies saying,
"Clearly those venerables are free of greed, hate, and delusion, or
practicing to be free of them"?' You should answer them: 'It's because
those venerables frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. In such places there are no sights known by the eye to see and
enjoy, there are no sounds known by the ear to hear and enjoy, no odors
known by the nose to smell and enjoy, no flavors known by the tongue to
taste and enjoy, and no touches known by the body to feel and enjoy.
These are the reasons and evidence that you have regarding those
venerables that justifies saying, "Clearly those venerables are free of
greed, hate, and delusion, or practicing to be free of them".' When
questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer
them."

When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Nagaravinda said to
the Buddha, "Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting
the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us as lay
followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="mn151">

### [MN 151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Purification of Alms ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Piṇḍapātapārisuddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat and went to
the Buddha. He bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is
pure and bright. What kind of meditation are you usually practicing
these days?"

"Sir, these days I usually practice the meditation on
emptiness."[2563](endnotes.xhtml_note-2563){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2563
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It seems you usually practice the meditation of
a great
man.[2564](endnotes.xhtml_note-2564){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2564
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} For emptiness is the meditation of a great
man.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I usually practice the meditation on
emptiness.' So they should reflect: 'Along the path that I went for
alms, or in the place I wandered for alms, or along the path that I
returned from alms, was there any desire or greed or hate or delusion or
repulsion in my heart for sights known by the
eye?'[2565](endnotes.xhtml_note-2565){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2565
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant
knows that there was such desire or greed or hate or delusion or
repulsion in their heart, they should make an effort to give up those
unskillful qualities. But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows
that there was no such desire or greed or hate or delusion or repulsion
in their heart, they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day
and night in skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Along the path that I went for
alms, or in the place I wandered for alms, or along the path that I
returned from alms, was there any desire or greed or hate or delusion or
repulsion in my heart for sounds known by the ear ... smells known by
the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches known by the body
... ideas known by the mind?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant
knows that there was such desire or greed or hate or delusion or
repulsion in their heart, they should make an effort to give up those
unskillful qualities. But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows
that there was no such desire or greed or hate or delusion or repulsion
in their heart, they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day
and night in skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should
reflect:[2566](endnotes.xhtml_note-2566){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2566
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} 'Have I given up the five kinds of sensual
stimulation?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they
have not given them up, they should make an effort to do so. But suppose
that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have given them up,
they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I given up the five
hindrances?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they
have not given them up, they should make an effort to do so. But suppose
that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have given them up,
they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I completely understood
the five grasping aggregates?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant
knows that they have not completely understood them, they should make an
effort to do so. But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that
they have completely understood them, they should meditate with rapture
and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I developed the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation?' Suppose that, upon checking, a
mendicant knows that they haven't developed them, they should make an
effort to do so. But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that
they have developed them, they should meditate with rapture and joy,
training day and night in skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I developed the four
right efforts ... the four bases of psychic power ... the five faculties
... the five powers ... the seven awakening factors ... the noble
eightfold path?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that
they haven't developed it, they should make an effort to do so. But
suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have developed
it, they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I developed serenity and
discernment?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they
haven't developed them, they should make an effort to do so. But suppose
that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have developed them,
they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful qualities.

Furthermore, a mendicant should reflect: 'Have I realized knowledge and
freedom?' Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they
haven't realized them, they should make an effort to do so. But suppose
that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that they have realized them,
they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in
skillful
qualities.[2567](endnotes.xhtml_note-2567){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2567
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who purify their
almsfood do so by continually checking in this way. So, Sāriputta, you
should all train like this: 'We shall purify our almsfood by continually
checking.'"[2568](endnotes.xhtml_note-2568){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2568
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Sāriputta approved
what the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="mn152">

### [MN 152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Development of the Faculties ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Indriyabhāvanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kajaṅgalā in a bamboo
grove.[2569](endnotes.xhtml_note-2569){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2569
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Then the brahmin student Uttara, a pupil of the brahmin Pārāsariya,
approached the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with
him.[2570](endnotes.xhtml_note-2570){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2570
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Uttara,
does Pārāsariya teach his disciples the development of the faculties?"

"He does, Mister Gotama."

"But how does he teach it?"

"Mister Gotama, it's when the eye sees no sight and the ear hears no
sound.[2571](endnotes.xhtml_note-2571){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2571
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} That's how Pārāsariya teaches his disciples
the development of the faculties."

"In that case, Uttara, a blind person and a deaf person will have
developed faculties according to what Pārāsariya says. For a blind
person sees no sight with the eye and a deaf person hears no sound with
the
ear."[2572](endnotes.xhtml_note-2572){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2572
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When he said this, Uttara sat silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, the
development of the faculties taught by Pārāsariya is quite different
from the supreme development of the faculties in the training of the
Noble One."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One. Let the Buddha
teach the supreme development of the faculties in the training of the
Noble One. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how, Ānanda, is there the supreme development of the faculties in
the training of the Noble One? When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, in them arises what is agreeable, what is disagreeable, and what
is both agreeable and disagreeable. They understand: 'What is agreeable,
what is disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have
arisen in me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But
this is peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable,
the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in
them cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a person
with clear eyes might open their eyes then shut them; or might shut
their eyes then open
them.[2573](endnotes.xhtml_note-2573){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2573
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Such is the speed, the swiftness, the ease
with which anything agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable and
disagreeable that arose in them cease, and equanimity becomes
stabilized. In the training of the Noble One this is called the supreme
development of the faculties regarding sights known by the
eye.[2574](endnotes.xhtml_note-2574){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2574
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

Furthermore, when a mendicant hears a sound with their ears, the
agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
arise in them. They understand: 'What is agreeable, what is
disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have arisen in
me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But this is
peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable, the
disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in them
cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a strong person
can effortlessly snap their fingers. Such is the speed, the swiftness,
the ease with which anything agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable
and disagreeable that arose in them cease, and equanimity becomes
stabilized. In the training of the Noble One this is called the supreme
development of the faculties regarding sounds known by the ear.

Furthermore, when a mendicant smells an odor with their nose, the
agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
arise in them. They understand: 'What is agreeable, what is
disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have arisen in
me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But this is
peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable, the
disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in them
cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a drop of water
would roll off a gently sloping lotus leaf, and would not stay there.
Such is the speed, the swiftness, the ease with which anything
agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable and disagreeable that arose
in them cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. In the training of the
Noble One this is called the supreme development of the faculties
regarding smells known by the nose.

Furthermore, when a mendicant tastes a flavor with their tongue, the
agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
arise in them. They understand: 'What is agreeable, what is
disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have arisen in
me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But this is
peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable, the
disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in them
cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a strong person
who's formed a glob of spit on the tip of their tongue could easily spit
it out. Such is the speed, the swiftness, the ease with which anything
agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable and disagreeable that arose
in them cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. In the training of the
Noble One this is called the supreme development of the faculties
regarding tastes known by the tongue.

Furthermore, when a mendicant feels a touch with their body, the
agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
arise in them. They understand: 'What is agreeable, what is
disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have arisen in
me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But this is
peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable, the
disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in them
cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a strong person
can extend or contract their arm. Such is the speed, the swiftness, the
ease with which anything agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable and
disagreeable that arose in them cease, and equanimity becomes
stabilized. In the training of the Noble One this is called the supreme
development of the faculties regarding touches known by the body.

Furthermore, when a mendicant knows a thought with their mind, the
agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
arise in them. They understand: 'What is agreeable, what is
disagreeable, and what is both agreeable and disagreeable have arisen in
me. That's conditioned, crude, and dependently originated. But this is
peaceful and sublime, namely equanimity.' Then the agreeable, the
disagreeable, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose in them
cease, and equanimity becomes stabilized. It's like how a strong person
could let two or three drops of water fall onto an iron cauldron that
had been heated all day. The drops would be slow to fall, but they'd
quickly dry up and evaporate. Such is the speed, the swiftness, the ease
with which anything agreeable, disagreeable, and both agreeable and
disagreeable that arose in them cease, and equanimity becomes
stabilized. In the training of the Noble One this is called the supreme
development of the faculties regarding ideas known by the mind. That's
how there is the supreme development of the faculties in the training of
the Noble One.

And how are they a practicing
trainee?[2575](endnotes.xhtml_note-2575){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2575
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, the agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable arise in them. They are horrified, repelled, and disgusted
by that. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When they smell an
odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...
When they feel a touch with their body ... When they know a thought with
their mind, the agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable arise in them. They are horrified, repelled, and disgusted
by that. That's how they are a practicing trainee.

And how are they a noble one with developed
faculties?[2576](endnotes.xhtml_note-2576){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2576
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, the agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable arise in them. If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's what they
do.[2577](endnotes.xhtml_note-2577){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2577
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving
the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish:
'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do.

When they hear a sound with their ear ... When they smell an odor with
their nose ... When they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they
feel a touch with their body ... When they know a thought with their
mind, the agreeable, the disagreeable, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable arise in them. If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I
meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they
do. If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the
repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May
I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the
repulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying
equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. That's how they are a noble one with
developed faculties.

So, Ānanda, I have taught the supreme development of the faculties in
the training of the Noble One, I have taught the practicing trainee, and
I have taught the noble one with developed faculties.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, Ānanda! Don't be negligent! Don't
regret it later! This is my instruction to
you."[2578](endnotes.xhtml_note-2578){#mn-salayatanavagga.xhtml_noteref-2578
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

The Middle Discourses are completed.

</article>

[]{#colophon.xhtml}

<article epub:type="colophon" id="colophon">

# Colophon

## The Translator

[Bhikkhu Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} was born as Anthony Aidan Best
on [4/11/1966]{.dc:date} in Perth, Western Australia. He grew up in the
pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and Attadale alongside his sister Nicola,
who was the good child. His mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née
Pinder, said "he'll either be a priest or a poet", while his father,
Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to "never do anything for money". He
attended Aquinas College, a Catholic school, where he decided to become
an atheist. At the University of WA he studied philosophy, aiming to
learn what he wanted to do with his life. Finding that what he wanted to
do was play guitar, he dropped out. His main band was named Martha's
Vineyard, which achieved modest success in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in 2018, and the
early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were complete by 2021. All this work
is dedicated to the public domain and is entirely free of copyright
encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

## Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the Pali Tipiṭaka.
Translated from the Pali, with reference to several English
translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

## The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable English; consistent
terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of copyright. It was
made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was staying in Qimei,
Taiwan.

## About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

## About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

## About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

</article>

[]{#imprint.xhtml}

:::::: {#imprint.xhtml_imprint .section .imprint}
`<cite property="dc:title">`{=html}Middle Discourses`</cite>`{=html} is
a translation of the [Majjhimanikāya]{property="dc:title"} by [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"}.

::: license
[Creative Commons Zero
([CC0]{.license-abbreviation})](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode){rel="license"
target="_blank"}

To the extent possible under law, [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} has waived all copyright and related or
neighboring rights to `<cite property="dct:title">`{=html}Middle
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}.

This work is published from
[Australia]{about="https://suttacentral.net/licensing" content="AU"
datatype="dct:ISO3166" property="vcard:Country"}.

<aside class="license-statement">

This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.

</aside>
:::

::: {.text-metadata about="https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/master/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn"}
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Web publication date   2018
  This edition           2024-08-19 01:54:37
  Publication type       epub
  Edition                ed2
  Number of volumes      1
  Publication ISBN       978-1-76132-057-6
  Publication URL        <https://suttacentral.net/editions/mn/en/sujato>
  Source URL             <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/mn>
  Publication number     scpub3
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: publisher
Published by [SuttaCentral]{.publisher property="dc:publisher"}

<address>
SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia\
</address>
:::
::::::
