# Pages

> These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring
> of the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are well
> organized, and the meaning is correctly interpreted. When the words
> and phrases are well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted.
> These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring
> of the true teaching.

[Aṅguttara Nikāya 2.20]{.epigraph-reference}

# The SuttaCentral Editions Series

Since 2005 SuttaCentral has provided access to the texts, translations,
and parallels of early Buddhist texts. In 2018 we started creating and
publishing our translations of these seminal spiritual classics. The
"Editions" series now makes selected translations available as books in
various forms, including print, PDF, and EPUB.

Editions are selected from our most complete, well-crafted, and reliable
translations. They aim to bring these texts to a wider audience in forms
that reward mindful reading. Care is taken with every detail of the
production, and we aim to meet or exceed professional best standards in
every way. These are the core scriptures underlying the entire Buddhist
tradition, and we believe that they deserve to be preserved and made
available in the highest quality without compromise.

SuttaCentral is a charitable organization. Our work is accomplished by
volunteers and through the generosity of our donors. Everything we
create is offered to all of humanity free of any copyright or licensing
restrictions.

# Preface

The topic of the future weighs heavily on the mind of the Aṅguttara. We
live in that future or beyond it. The "future perils" of the Aṅguttara
(AN 5.77--80) are upon us and have been for quite some time. King Ashoka
referred to these suttas, which include the peril of corruption in the
Saṅgha; perhaps he worried that his generosity, though intended to
support Buddhism, would ultimately lead to its decay.

Today the future perils are greater than ever. It is as if the seven
suns are appearing in the sky (AN 7.66). We want to face the future with
hope for a better life, but the horizon dims and draws closer, while we
clutch our loved ones and prepare for the worst.

It was the novelist William Gibson who said, "the future is already
here---it's just not very evenly distributed". His saying conceals
layers of meaning. The future is here because we see scientific,
technological, and human marvels every day that are far beyond our
comprehension. Yet such advances are for the few, and only trickle
gradually, if at all, to people in need. The future is also here in a
negative sense, in that the catastrophic effects of climate collapse are
readily apparent; and yet there too, their effects are unevenly
distributed, massively impacting those who have the least capacity to
deal with them.

The way of the Dhamma is to neither deny such things nor to be paralyzed
by them, but to live, urgently and vitally, in the present. We live as
if the future was uncertain, because it is. Our only certainty is that
all this will disappear.

The Buddha stayed calm in the face of terrors. Living well now, we let
the future take care of itself. The Buddha did not pretend to be able to
control the future, so why should we?

As a Buddhist, I might rephrase Gibson's saying: "the present is already
here---it's just not very evenly distributed". The art of meditation is
the art of presence, and in that presence, we can be grateful for all
that we have, mindful of all our blessings, and fearless when facing the
future. It is when we lose our presence that our fears can overcome us.
So let us not lose our presence.

</article>

[]{#introduction.xhtml}

<article class="preface" id="introduction">

# The Numbered Discourses: things that are useful every day

Bhikkhu Sujato, 2019

<nav class="contents">

1.  [How the Aṅguttara is Organized](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1)
2.  [The Book of the Ones](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2)
3.  [The Book of the Twos](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3)
4.  [The Book of the Threes](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4)
5.  [A Brief Textual History](#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5)

</nav>

The Aṅguttara Nikāya is the last and longest of the four primary
divisions of the Sutta Piṭaka. The word *aṅguttara* means "up by one
factor", i.e. "incremental". It refers to the fact that the discourses
are arranged by numbered sets, with the numbers increasing by one. I
have translated it as `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Numbered
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}, while previously it has been translated as
the `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Numerical
Discourses`</cite>`{=html} or the
`<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Gradual Sayings`</cite>`{=html}.

SuttaCentral follows Bhikkhu Bodhi's translation in counting 8122
discourses in total. The summary verse at the end of the collection,
however, says there are 9,557 suttas. This scribal remark does not say
how this count was arrived at; it must have been quite a process to
count so many discourses when dealing only with palm-leaf manuscripts.
In any case, as with the Saṁyutta Nikāya, this count is largely a
product of discourses repeated according to templates. Many of these
consist only of a single word; indeed, the process of abbreviation is
carried to such extremes that hundreds of suttas do not exist at all in
the text; they are merely numbers to be filled out. Also, in the case of
the Ones and Twos, most of the suttas are longer texts that have been
divided to make the numbers. On SuttaCentral, these are treated as if
one *vagga* was a sutta, and the abbreviated texts likewise are
combined. If we count the files of the texts combined in this way, we
arrive at more reasonable, but still very large, 1407 texts of
substance.

The focus of the `<cite class="text-translated">`{=html}Numbered
Discourses`</cite>`{=html} is on practical matters of everyday
relevance. Guidelines of ethics and character predominate. If the
Saṁyutta Nikāya gathers the chief teachings on *doctrines*, the
Aṅguttara gathers the teachings on *persons*. The concerns of the lay
community are a major focus, and many teachings deal with how to teach.

The use of numbered sets is found throughout the Buddhist texts, but
here it becomes the main organizing principle. The typical Aṅguttara
discourse consists of a statement that there is certain number of
something; then an explanation of each item; then a conclusion that
echoes the introduction. Sometimes a verse is added that summarizes the
content. This formal pattern is highly optimized to reinforce learning
and memorization. It is, in essence, the same format that is used in the
nightly news: begin by listing the news items for today; give the
stories of each of the items; and then summarize the highlights once
more. The use of numbered sets remains popular today, with the
"listicle" being a favorite format for internet articles.

Unlike these modern examples, however, the sets of teachings in the
Aṅguttara are strongly structured. They are not merely collections of
items on a theme, but make up an integrated sequence. The first item is
the most fundamental; the subsequent items evolve from or build upon
that; and the final item caps off the sequence.

For this reason the Aṅguttara provides an excellent entry point to the
canon, especially for those with a limited amount of time. It only takes
a few minutes to read a sutta, and it will contain within itself a
complete and useful teaching.

The Aṅguttara Nikāya has a counterpart in the Ekottarikāgama preserved
in the Chinese canon (EA). The Ekottarikāgama is a peculiar text of
uncertain (possibly Mahāsaṅghika) affiliation, and it differs from the
Pali text to a much greater extent than the parallels for DN, MN, and
SN. In addition, there are two partial Ekottarikas in Chinese, as well
as several independent Ekottarika-style suttas. Moreover, a substantial
portion of a Sanskrit Ekottarāgama was discovered at Gilgit and has been
edited and partially reconstructed by Tripāṭhi. While it is difficult to
generalize, it seems as if most of these materials lie closer to the
Pali text than the main EA in Chinese.

## How the Aṅguttara is Organized {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item1}

The Aṅguttara Nikāya consists of major "books" (*nipāta*) numbered one
through eleven. Each of these contains discourses consisting of the
corresponding number of items. As usual, the discourses are gathered
into *vaggas*, which sometimes have a loose theme. Each *nipāta*, except
the first, organizes its *vaggas* into *paṇṇāsas*.

I don't know why the Aṅguttara counts to eleven; I would expect a round
number. Eleven is shared in common with the Chinese Ekottarikāgama,
which suggests it was an early feature, yet it does not appear to be
driven by the texts themselves, as most of the items in the Book of the
Elevens consist of teachings familiar elsewhere, with the addition of an
item or two.

It sometimes feels as if the Aṅguttara was assembled from leftovers.
After the long suttas were gathered in the Majjhima and Dīgha, and the
shorter suttas on central themes into the Saṁyutta, a large mass of
texts remained that resisted easy categorization. This included many
fascinating and profound teachings, as well as a large mass of stock
repetitions, and it trailed off into odds and ends of increasingly
obscure value. It's as if the redactors, faced with a warehouse of
leftovers and bric-à-brac, tried their best to shelve and stack the
items in a logical way, but were often left with just plonking things on
shelves as best they could. Since the texts usually had a distinct
number in the teaching, this was taken as the organizational principle,
in lieu of anything more meaningful. Even texts that don't explicitly
mention a number can often be analyzed into a set of items, so they
could be included too. (See for example [AN
3.31](https://suttacentral.net/an3.31){.ref} and [AN
3.32](https://suttacentral.net/an3.32){.ref}.)

To be clear, it should not be thought that the Aṅguttara lacks the
standard teachings familiar from the rest of the *nikāyas*. On the
contrary, we find the four absorptions ([AN
3.58](https://suttacentral.net/an3.58){.ref}), the four noble truths and
dependent origination ([AN
3.61](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61){.ref}), the faculties and powers
([AN 4.163](https://suttacentral.net/an4.163){.ref}; the latter in some
detail at [AN 5.12--16](https://suttacentral.net/an5.12){.ref}), the
threefold training ([AN 3.81](https://suttacentral.net/an3.81){.ref}),
the divine meditations ([AN
3.63](https://suttacentral.net/an3.63){.ref}), and many more. But such
teachings are scattered throughout a large mass of suttas on a diverse
range of topics.

In the introduction to his translation, Bhikkhu Bodhi practically
abandons any attempt to make sense of the structure. He gives an example
of a chapter with several seemingly unrelated discourses, remarking:
"With such apparently arbitrary organization, one cannot but wonder what
the compilers had in mind." (`<cite class="book">`{=html}The Numerical
Discourses of the Buddha`</cite>`{=html}, introduction, p. 22). As a
result, rather than analyze the content as it occurs in the Aṅguttara,
he developed an extensive and carefully-considered thematic analysis.
[This essay is available on
SuttaCentral](https://suttacentral.net/an-introduction-bodhi), and I
encourage anyone interested in a serious study of the Aṅguttara to read
it.

I would like to approach the material from a different perspective,
however, one that lies closer to the experience of reading the text. I
find Bhikkhu Bodhi's question an intriguing one: what were the redactors
thinking?

While there is no doubt that the sequence of suttas and ideas in the
Aṅguttara is to some extent chaotic, is it plausible that the same body
of people who displayed such rigorous dedication to classification in
the Saṁyutta should simply abandon their efforts in the Aṅguttara?
Perhaps to understand the redactors better, and through them the
teachings that they worked with, we must approach the problem in a new
way.

Here are three organizational principles that I have noticed while
reading the Aṅguttara:

1.  Numerological meaning.
2.  Thematic clusters, segues, and arcs.
3.  Spaced repetition.

Below I will show how these things work out over the first three
*nipātas*. In this way, I hope to guide a reader through the wilds until
they feel comfortable proceeding on their own.

It is surely not the case that these are the only organizational
principles at work. Nor is it the case that they fully explain all, or
even most, of the randomness. But they do, I believe, hint at a guiding
understanding that shaped the collection in the form we have it today.

One general thought first. Much of how we organize and relate to the
world is not through reason but through association. If we think of it
in terms of the five aggregates, a collection such as the Saṁyutta
Nikāya has an overall structure that is deliberately thought through and
constructed, i.e. it is based on rational choices or *saṅkhārās*.
Perhaps what we need to look for in the Aṅguttara is a different way of
thinking, one based on perception, memory, and association (*saññā*).

But why would such a large mass of texts be organized in such a way? The
answer is not hard to find. Like so many of the principles that organize
the texts, it is for memorization. For a reciter who has to keep
hundreds of texts in order, *any* kind of connection works. It doesn't
matter if it's the topic, a shared word, a syntax, a rhyme, or anything
else. Perception recognizes patterns. It associates one thing with the
next, regardless of how significant the connecting feature is.

Imagine, if you will, that you're organizing your library. You could use
a rational system: alphabetical order, subject matter, or size to fit
your shelves. But it's your library, you can do what you want. Maybe on
one shelf, you put books with blue covers; on another, books you haven't
read; and on another, books whose smell reminds you of old friends. To
anyone else it seems chaotic, but to you it makes perfect sense. You can
find the book you need when you want to. Perception does the heavy
lifting for you, without the cognitive strain of having to work through
the rational system every time.

### The meaning of numbers

For the most part the use of numbers in Buddhist texts is entirely
pragmatic. Once you know that a set has a certain number of items, you
can tell if you've forgotten something.

Yet numbers have always been imbued with a significance and meaning that
transcends mere accounting. They allow us to make sense of a complex
cosmos through a simple set of conventions. Numbers are used in Buddhism
to provoke awe, even fear, at the "astronomical" scope of
transmigration. Is it possible that the symbolic meaning of numbers
lends a sense of unity to the various *nipātas*?

Symbolic meaning is, by its very nature, impossible to pin down with
precision. Unlike rational definition, it does not serve to limit the
scope of meaning but to amplify it through suggestion, hints, and
connotations. The symbolic meaning of numbers has, so far as I know,
mostly been ignored in Buddhist studies. Some numerological observations
were made in the number entries in the Rhys Davids' and Stede's
`<cite class="book">`{=html}Pali-English Dictionary`</cite>`{=html}, but
I am aware of little since then. However, we can make a few general
observations.

One
:   The number of harmony, simplicity, and supremacy. It is especially
    emphasized in the context of deep meditation (*jhāna* or *samādhi*).
    However, unlike many spiritual contexts, in Buddhism it never has a
    metaphysical sense: Nibbāna is zero, not one; it is emptiness, not
    unity.

Two
:   Used for pairs, which may be partners---hands, eyes, man and
    wife---opponents---good vs. evil, light vs. dark, pain vs.
    pleasure---or successors---skill in entering meditation and skill in
    leaving it. It represents the dualities of the world.

Three
:   Made up of 2 + 1. It adds an extra, often spiritual, dimension to
    the worldly dualism of two. This is quite explicit in such sets as
    "gratification, drawback, and escape", and more subtly in, say,
    pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings. Three represents the
    *other*; and it is the other which contains the seed of
    transcendence.

Four
:   The most characteristic number of Buddhism, and the Book of the
    Fours is the largest of the *nipātas*. Its primary metaphor is the
    four quarters, and thus connotes totality and balance, most
    obviously in the four noble truths. Multiples of four have the same
    meaning at a higher order. Ten is similar, in that it is derived
    from the four quarters, the four intermediate quarters, and above
    and below.

Five
:   Stems from the hand, which is what we use to count; hence it divides
    into 4 + 1 (fingers and thumb) rather than 2 + 3. The most obvious
    example of this is the five "grasping" aggregates, where
    consciousness stands against the other four. Likewise in, say, the
    five faculties and powers, wisdom is the "thumb".

Six
:   Takes as its root metaphor the body: four limbs, torso, and head.
    The general sense is a "large whole", and the most prominent set is
    the six sense fields.

Seven
:   An astronomical number, derived from the lunar cycles and the
    heavenly bodies (sun + moon + five visible planets). It is used
    especially commonly in myth, and has the general sense of "the
    entire cycle of life and death". It appears in this sense in the
    story of the Bodhisatta's birth.

I believe that we can indeed discern traces of these meanings in the
Aṅguttara, and offer some examples below. In some cases, the texts of a
certain number would have been simply imported into the collection,
while in other cases the text would have been edited specifically to
create the necessary numbered set. Either way, having some sense of
these meanings gives us a perspective through which to see the *nipātas*
as meaningful wholes.

With such general meanings, and doubtless many exceptions and
contradictions, it is not possible to establish beyond doubt that the
numbers of the Aṅguttara have a symbolic meaning. If you dislike any
attempt at reading symbolic meaning, I cannot prove you wrong. But it
does, I believe, give us an approach through which to appreciate why the
redactors dealt with their diverse and complex material in this way.

### Thematic clusters, segues, and arcs

Despite its chaotic impression, suttas in the Aṅguttara are rarely
isolated. Most of the time they appear in *thematic clusters* that deal
with the same topic. This might be just a pair of suttas, though it's
not uncommon to find an entire *vagga* on a specific theme. These are
often closely related suttas, simply varying a few details from one to
the next. Or they may have a loose thematic thread, featuring, for
example, the same person, or group of persons. In several cases,
*vaggas* of the same name and theme appear multiple times in the
collection.

Such thematic clusters are easy to recognize; but still, it often seems
as if there is nothing that connects one cluster with the next. However,
this is not always the case. Often the shift from one cluster to another
happens through what might be called a *thematic segue*. When moving
from one thematic cluster to the next, some common element is
maintained. This might be a topic, or simply some formal feature---a
question format, a word, a syntax, etc. Such hooks help smooth the
transition from cluster to cluster.

In such cases we find that there is some element in the first cluster
\[A\], which is combined with a second element \[AB\] to form a new
cluster or extend the old one. Then the second element is combined with
something else to make yet another cluster \[BC\]. And perhaps later the
second element is dropped altogether leaving just the third \[C\], or it
is recombined with something new. If you compare the first element \[A\]
with the third \[C\] there's nothing in common. Yet the progress from
one to the other is gradual. And the frequency with which this occurs
shows that it is by no means accidental.

Similar techniques are a stock in trade of musical composition. After
introducing a motif, the composer gradually transforms and develops it.
Eventually, they might arrive at a new motif, which shares nothing in
common with the original, but from which it evolved.

A thematic segue is often a purely formal technique that says little
about the subject matter. However, with careful attention we can see
that thematic clusters, chained together with segues, sometimes evolve
over larger spans of text to create a loosely organized *thematic arc*.
Such arcs echo teaching frameworks that are familiar from elsewhere,
such as the Gradual Training. This is used, for example, to inform the
shape of the first 75 suttas of the Book of the Ones. Such arcs are by
no means as clear and formally structured as the teachings on which they
are based. Yet the progress from one topic to the next is undeniable.

Indeed, each *nipāta* can be seen as forming its own arc, as they
typically begin with basic practices, and end with realizing Nibbāna.
The repetition series that round out each *nipāta* also have their
internal arc, leading towards the highest qualities.

### Spaced repetition

In the Dīgha and Majjhima Nikāyas, a student would spend a fair period
of time memorizing one specific text, rehearsing it, and---if they are a
good student---inquiring and questioning about the meaning. Only when it
was mastered would they move on to the next. In the Saṁyutta, a student
would learn dozens, even hundreds of suttas on the same topic, sharing
similar passages and ideas, and often varying little one to the other.
Such suttas may be memorized quickly, and interpretive problems often
arise at the level of the topic rather than the individual text.

But memorizing long texts, or many texts on the same subject, can get
boring, for the mind is stimulated by variety and surprise. In the
Aṅguttara, a student would learn one or two suttas on a topic, or maybe
a few more, then something else, then back to the original topic, then a
third. Now, as we have seen, various features help keep the sequence of
texts straight. But perhaps there is something more to it: perhaps the
very randomness and repetition help them to learn.

This is a lot like the modern technique known as "spaced repetition",
commonly used for language learning. A vocabulary of words is introduced
one at a time in a random sequence. After learning one word, one moves
on to another. But the first word is then re-introduced a little later
to reinforce learning. And so it goes, with the same words coming back
again and again. In terms of the sequence from one word to the next,
everything is random. But the overall pattern is carefully optimized to
reinforce and speed up memorization.

Perhaps we could think of it like a school. The Saṁyutta is like a
school *curriculum*: everything you need to know on a topic, all in one
place. But the Aṅguttara is like a school *day*. One class follows the
other, and there is no real rhyme and reason to it. Some things happen
fairly regularly and predictably, while others seem to just pop up at
random. Despite its more chaotic nature, it works: that's how we learn.
No one would suggest that school subjects are best mastered by first
learning the science curriculum, then the maths, then the history. Not
only does the spaced repetition reinforce learning, but it provokes us
to see new and unexpected connections between things.

## The Book of the Ones {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item2}

I have suggested that the number one carries with it a specific set of
connotations, notably harmony, simplicity, and supremacy. If this is
framed as an overall theme, it might be something like this: keep your
spiritual practice simple and focused to help your mind attain deep
immersion, and in that way, you can realize the supreme Dhamma. Let us
see how the Book of the Ones exemplifies these attributes.

The Book of the Ones is a rather special case in that virtually the
entire *nipāta* is constructed from fragments and templates. The
collection begins with the striking assertion that no sight occupies a
man's mind like that of a woman, or a woman's mind like that of a man.
The remainder of the exterior senses are listed for each gender binary,
making ten suttas in all for the first *vagga*. This very much has the
appearance of a single sutta divided into ten. In the Fives ([AN
5.55](https://suttacentral.net/an5.55){.ref}) we find a similar set of
statements given in a particular context, dealing with the masculine
perspective only. And in the Chinese, we find that the parallels at EA
9.7 and EA 9.8 fit the two halves of this *vagga*. This supports the
idea that these texts were originally combined to form a single sutta,
or perhaps a pair of suttas.

An even clearer example of this is provided by the three pairs of suttas
at [AN 1.76](https://suttacentral.net/an1.76){.ref} to [AN
1.81](https://suttacentral.net/an1.81){.ref}. Each of the pairs follows
the same pattern, exemplified by the first pair. [AN
1.76](https://suttacentral.net/an1.76){.ref} says that the loss of
relatives is a small thing, while wisdom is the worst thing to lose. [AN
1.77](https://suttacentral.net/an1.77){.ref} presents the inverse:
growth of relatives is a small thing, for wisdom is the best thing to
grow. But it continues to round off the sutta by urging the mendicants
to train to grow in wisdom. This conclusion is lacking in the first of
the pair and is a clear sign that the text has been divided.

One should not conclude from this that the text has been assembled
haphazardly. On the contrary, we can identify a series of arcs that bind
long series of suttas together. The opening chapters are designed to
show the development of meditation, echoing the meditator's progress in
the Gradual Training.

- The first chapter, as we have seen already, deals with the restraint
  of sexuality, one of the foundations of meditation.
- The second chapter deals with the hindrances which must be abandoned
  before entering deep meditation. This is linked via a thematic segue
  from the previous chapter, the link being the phrase "I do not see a
  single thing".
- The third and fourth chapters deal with the advantages of the
  developed mind, which has been purified through the process of
  meditation: nothing brings greater happiness and benefit. They
  continue using the phrase "I do not see a single thing".
- The fifth chapter abandons the phrase "I do not see a single thing".
  Here the thematic segue is the topic of "mind" (*citta*) and its
  development.
- The fifth chapter ends with two discourses that mention the famous
  "radiant mind". These are fragments, and a more complete statement is
  found in the following suttas that start the next chapter. It is
  somewhat unusual to find such closely connected suttas broken over a
  *vagga* boundary like this. Note that the "radiant mind" is not a
  metaphysical term, and neither here nor anywhere else in the early
  Buddhist texts is the mind said to be "intrinsically" or "naturally"
  or "originally" radiant or luminous. On the contrary, the mind is
  conditioned and hence is not "intrinsically" anything at all. The
  radiant mind is simply a way of talking about meditative absorption or
  *jhāna*.
- The sixth chapter continues on the theme of absorption. However, it
  changes theme at [AN
  1.56](https://suttacentral.net/an1.56){.ref}---though maintaining
  focus on "mind"---and continues by addressing the causality of good
  and bad qualities. In context, these can be understood as pertaining
  to the wisdom portion of meditation, as treated in the fourth of the
  *satipaṭṭhānas*. This series culminates at [AN
  1.75](https://suttacentral.net/an1.75){.ref} with the perfection of
  the awakening factors, thus signifying the completion of the path.

A structure such as this is particularly telling as it reveals the
intent of the redactors. This thematic arc spanning 75 fragmentary
suttas does not exist in the sources at all: it is purely implied by the
choices of the redactors. Their method was to reduce the statements of
the Dhamma to their simplest meaningful elements, then reassemble them
according to the principles of the Dhamma as they understood them.

And the redactors were even more subtle than that. For not only are
these fragments assembled to form a coherent whole, but the choice of
theme was quite deliberate. Of all the doctrinal contexts in Buddhism,
it is *samādhi* or "unification of mind" where the number one is most
prominent. In starting with the Ones, the redactors were sensitive to
the use of numbers in the canon, and arranged their texts to bring the
most important "one" to the fore.

From here, the text shifts focus. As noted above, [AN
1.76--81](https://suttacentral.net/an1.71-81){.ref} deals with pairs of
gain and loss. Then from [AN
1.82](https://suttacentral.net/an1.82-97){.ref} we have a series of
texts on those things that are harmful and beneficial, starting with the
pair of negligence and diligence. While these teachings are of course
common throughout the canon, it is fitting that they appear here to
represent the Aṅguttara's special focus on the fundamentals of a good
life. Here they exemplify the aspect of *simplicity*, helping a student
to focus on just one aspect of Dhamma at a time.

The same set of factors is treated a few times with slightly varying
templates, the final of which says that each of these harmful things
leads to the disappearance of Buddhism, while the good things lead to
its continuation. This leads us up to [AN
1.129](https://suttacentral.net/an1.98-139){.ref}.

From [AN 1.130--169](https://suttacentral.net/an1.98-139){.ref}, the
topic of the preservation of the Dhamma is continued, but applied to a
new theme, one that is quite distinctive of the Aṅguttara: teaching the
Dhamma. Specifically, those who present the Dhamma accurately make much
merit and preserve Buddhism, while those who distort or misrepresent the
Dhamma make bad karma and destroy Buddhism. This series of texts
displays its inner structure, as it begins with simply the "teaching"
and then continues to differentiate the Dhamma more and more finely,
especially with the introduction of the Vinaya and a rather extensive
list of technical terms for monastic discipline. It does not take much
to see that an originally simple statement could have been drawn out by
adding multiple aspects of the teaching, conveniently giving the
students of the Aṅguttara some Vinaya material to learn.

This series of suttas grows out of the former, with the theme of
preserving Buddhism as the thematic segue. Thus we have, from [AN
1.82](https://suttacentral.net/an1.82-97){.ref} through [AN
1.169](https://suttacentral.net/an1.150-169){.ref}, a second thematic
arc consisting of 88 suttas.

From [AN 1.170](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187){.ref} a new theme
is introduced, one that also represents a key aspect of the Aṅguttara:
persons. Buddhism is, of course, most famous for its teachings on
not-self, and its impersonal analysis of psychological processes. But
there is plenty of material throughout the suttas that deals with
persons, or character types, and much of that is in the Aṅguttara. These
texts were later assembled to form the Abhidhamma text the
Puggalapaññatti, the "Description of Persons".

Of all the persons in Buddhism, the incomparable one is the Buddha
himself. While there is a series of Buddhas over the ages, in our age he
is unique. Hence these suttas speak of the "one person" who arises in
the world who is uniquely beneficial and transcendent. At [AN
1.187](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187){.ref} the Buddha's chief
disciple, Sāriputta, is praised as the one who continues to roll the
wheel of Dhamma after the Buddha. This segues into the next series of
suttas, which single out individual followers of the Buddha for
particular praise. This is a rather fascinating list, in which appear
many characters from all over the canon; not only the four *nikāyas*,
but the Vinaya and the Khuddaka as well. Prominent monks appear in [AN
1.188--234](https://suttacentral.net/an1.188-197){.ref}; nuns from [AN
1.235--247](https://suttacentral.net/an1.235-247){.ref}; laymen from [AN
1.248--257](https://suttacentral.net/an1.248-257){.ref}; and laywomen,
from [AN 1.258--267](https://suttacentral.net/an1.258-267){.ref}. All of
these people are "number one" in their field, exemplifying the sense of
"one" as *supremacy*.

The next chapter continues the theme of "persons", enumerating various
things that are possible or impossible for various people. For example,
it is impossible for one "attained to view"---that is, a
stream-enterer---to take any condition as permanent. But from [AN
1.284--295](https://suttacentral.net/an1.278-286){.ref}, once again we
find a thematic segue; the "person" vanishes and the theme of possible
and impossible is applied rather on an impersonal level: good things
cannot come from bad deeds.

This makes up the third great thematic arc in the Ones, 126 suttas from
[AN 1.170](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187){.ref} to [AN
1.295](https://suttacentral.net/an1.287-295){.ref}. The remainder of the
Ones continues similarly, with fragmented suttas assembled along loose
thematic lines. The themes remain similar, with one difference. As the
Book draws closer to its end, the subject of Nibbāna, the final goal of
Buddhism, becomes ever more prominent. The final *vagga* is called the
"Chapter on the Deathless", and it deals directly with the path to full
awakening. Thus the sense of thematic unity that has been evident in
multiple sections of the Book of the Ones is also evident in its overall
structure, assembled by the redactors to culminate in awakening.

## The Book of the Twos {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item3}

The second *nipāta* is a kind of bridge between the "arcs of fragments"
that characterize the first *nipāta* and the more complete suttas that
become prominent in the remainder of the Aṅguttara. It echoes and
amplifies the themes of the first *nipāta*, while also introducing new
ideas.

It begins with a series of suttas that speak of the fundamental
principles of the good life: doing good and avoiding bad ([AN
2.3--4](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10){.ref}) and the results of
deeds in this life and the next ([AN
2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10){.ref}). This, I think, announces
what the redactors aimed to be the chief theme of this *nipāta*: the
idea that there is a moral order in the world, there is good and evil,
and if we comprehend this we can live our life well. The collection
starts by emphasizing this fact, and the dire consequences of ignoring
it.

The second chapter builds on this, speaking on the "power of reflection"
to look back and understand this moral order, and the "power of
development" to move on from the bad and develop the good ([AN
2.11--13](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}). A specific example
of this is given in the case of a disciplinary measure within the Saṅgha
([AN 2.15](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}; cp. [AN
2.21](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31){.ref}). When one mendicant
accuses another of wrongdoing, both should "reflect" on what happened
and their role in the affair, and only then can the issue be properly
healed and everyone move on. This chapter also details in various
respects the way that good and bad deeds lead to various results ([AN
2.16](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}, [AN
2.17](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}), spelling out a series
of results that pertain both to this life and the next ([AN
2.18](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}). The Buddha then
introduces the idea of a deliberate practice: one should not only
recognize these things and reflect on them within oneself but develop
the good and give up the bad, for it is possible to do so ([AN
2.19](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}).

These suttas (and others) build on the teachings found in the first
*nipāta* that deal with basic principles. They conclude the opening arc
that establishes the theme of this *nipāta*: the worldly duality of good
and bad, which creates both a responsibility and an opportunity to
respond.

But it should not be thought that these chapters are fully coherent and
systematic. One finds the occasional sutta that appears quite random,
for example [AN 2.10](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10){.ref} on
entering the rainy season retreat; or [AN
2.60](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63){.ref} on why fauns
(*kimpurisa*) do not use human speech.

Meanwhile, distinct themes from the first *nipāta* are also introduced,
mixed up without clear order. [AN
2.14](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref} mentions two ways of
teaching Dhamma---in brief and in detail---while [AN
2.20](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref} says that the survival
of Buddhism depends on getting both the meaning and the phrasing of the
texts correct (also see [AN
2.41](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref}). [AN
2.23](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31){.ref} reprises the theme that
one who distorts the teaching misrepresents the Buddha and contributes
to the ending of Buddhism. This applies to those who claim that things
were spoken by the Buddha when they were not.

[AN 2.24](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31){.ref} introduces the
contrast between the discourses that require interpretation
(*neyyattha*) and those whose meaning is explicit (*nītattha*). In some
suttas (eg. [MN 133](https://suttacentral.net/mn133){.ref}), we find
that the Buddha gives a brief statement which the mendicants do not
understand, so they seek advice on how to interpret it. In other cases a
verse or doctrinal statement is unclear and the mendicants discuss it.
These examples show that the process of discussion and analysis of the
Buddha's teaching was underway from the very beginning. This process was
eventually to be formalized as the various sets of Abhidhamma texts and
spelled out in the commentaries. But these later texts did not yet
exist, and should not be read back into the suttas.

[AN 2.31](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31){.ref} reintroduces another
of the themes of the first *nipāta*: meditation. The pair of serenity
(*samatha*) and discernment (or "insight", *vipassanā*) are said to play
a part in realization: serenity develops the mind, while *vipassanā*
develops wisdom. Together they lead to the two aspects of awakening: the
freedom of heart and the freedom by wisdom.

But this is, for the moment, an isolated text, for the next series of
texts returns to the theme of persons. This theme was briefly introduced
earlier, when [AN 2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10){.ref}
contrasted the efforts of lay folk and renunciants. [AN
2.32](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref} says that a good person
knows gratitude, while the bad one does not. [AN
2.33](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref} speaks of the strongest
and most emotional ties of gratitude, those of a child to their parents.
The Buddha says that even by carrying your parents around for the rest
of their lives, feeding and cleaning them, you cannot repay them the
gift of life. Only by establishing them in the principles of the Dhamma
can you repay them. The theme of respect for parents is further
developed in [AN 3.31](https://suttacentral.net/an3.31){.ref}.

In [AN 2.35](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref} the Buddha tells
a brahmin that the traditional religious donation (*dakkhiṇa*) is owed
to those who are purified, that is, the trainee and master on the path.
These replace the sacrifice of the brahmins. Next follow some teachings
by disciples, in which both Sāriputta ([AN
2.36](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref}) and Mahākaccāna ([AN
2.38](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref}) make a distinction
between inner and outer practice, while Mahākaccāna makes a shrewd
observation: householders argue about sensual pleasures, but renunciants
argue over views ([AN 2.37](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref}).
In [AN 2.39](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41){.ref} the Buddha makes
a rather biting comparison between a kingdom overrun with bandits and a
Saṅgha where the good mendicants are weak, cowed into silence. The
following chapter ([AN
2.42--51](https://suttacentral.net/an2.42-51){.ref}) expands on this by
contrasting good and bad assemblies.

From assemblies as groups of people, the text revisits yet another theme
of the first *nipāta*: the Buddha as the supreme person. Here he is
paired with his worldly counterpart, the wheel-turning emperor ([AN
2.52--55](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63){.ref}). Continuing with
the theme of kinds of people, [AN
2.62](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63){.ref} and [AN
2.63](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63){.ref} describe procedures in
the Saṅgha for settling disputes and living harmoniously.

The next chapter is tightly constructed on the subject of happiness
(*sukha*). It introduces the topic by contrasting the happiness of lay
people and that of renunciants, of which the latter is better ([AN
2.64](https://suttacentral.net/an2.64-76){.ref}). This continues the
theme of persons, specifically the contrast between lay folk and
renunciants, which was already stated in the second text of the
*nipāta*. Here it is combined with the topic of happiness, which is new.
A series of suttas expands on this theme, but it uses a thematic segue
to move away from the focus on "persons" and speak of happiness in
purely psychological terms more reminiscent of the Saṁyutta.

This chapter itself forms another segue---a nested segue if you
will---to the next series of chapters, the unifying characteristic being
the tight integration of short suttas on a single pattern in a *vagga*,
returning to the kind of "vagga as sutta" that we saw in the Book of the
Ones. Chapter 8 deals with the causes for good and bad qualities;
Chapter 9 deals with various miscellaneous pairs of "things" (*dhammā*);
Chapter 10 deals with the contrast between the fool and the astute; and
Chapter 11, while a little more diverse, caps off this series.

[AN 2.130](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140){.ref}--[AN
2.133](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140){.ref} eulogize great
disciples, reminding us of the lists of the foremost disciples in the
Book of the Ones. A few discourses then revisit the theme of good and
bad people inheriting the results of their deeds ([AN
2.134](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140){.ref}--[AN
2.137](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140){.ref}). The remainder of
the *nipāta* lists a long series of pairs of contrasted qualities.
Particularly interesting is the series at [AN
2.280--309](https://suttacentral.net/an2.280-309){.ref} where the Buddha
gives the reasons for laying down rules for monastics. Normally this is
a list of ten reasons, but here they are arranged as pairs. The final
series speaks of developing deep understanding and letting go through
the pair of serenity and discernment. Thus, despite its main focus on
worldly ethics and results, the second *nipāta*, like the first, ends
with the practices leading to awakening.

## The Book of the Threes {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item4}

With this book we move on from the fragmentary assemblages of the Book
of the Ones and partly the Book of the Twos, and find more
conventionally unified suttas. Of course, this is never an absolute, as
all the books of the Aṅguttara retain extensive repetition series.
Still, the focus from now is clearly on the whole sutta; and as a
consequence, the hand of the redactors is harder to discern.

That does not mean, however, that there is a dramatic break from the
first books. On the contrary, the Book of the Threes begins with a
thematic *vagga* that focuses on the familiar contrasting pair of the
fool and the astute. The number three is represented in the qualities
that are said to characterize them. The Bālavagga (Chapter on the Fool)
corresponds to the similarly-named third and tenth chapters of the Twos,
as well as the second chapter of the Fives.

Like the Books of the Ones and Twos, this *nipāta* begins by emphasizing
the problematic situation that we are in, the tensions and struggles of
our worldly situation. The second *vagga* shifts focus to what we can do
about it.

Thus in [AN 3.13](https://suttacentral.net/an3.13){.ref} we first see a
clear example of the number three as a worldly binary and a transcendent
dimension that resolves the contradiction. This sutta speaks of one
without hope---someone afflicted by poverty and misery of station, as
well as illness of body---and a hopeful person, who looks to a bright
future. But then there is the one who has done away with hope: since
they have achieved their goal, there is nothing to look forward to.

[AN 3.14](https://suttacentral.net/an3.14){.ref} makes an important
political point: even the greatest of rulers are subject to the rule of
law (*dhamma*). Here the relevant group of three is action by body,
speech, and mind. This triad---which is pre-Buddhist---expresses one of
the fundamental principles of the Dhamma, the focus on ethical choices
and good deeds. It is found constantly throughout the Threes. Whereas a
worldly philosophy might take into consideration only a person's
external acts of body and speech, for Buddhism the mind is always the
most important. It is the mind that is ultimately responsible for what
we do and say, and it is through the mind that freedom is found. Thus
the mind here points to the transcendent dimension of escape.

The next discourse continues with the threefold division of body,
speech, and mind, giving some practical advice as to how to work for
their proper development. For the first time the Aṅguttara ventures into
narrative. It tells the story of a chariot maker of the past, who was
commissioned by the king to make a new war chariot for a battle in six
months. This is a rather striking setup: the scale of society is so
small that it is unremarkable for a king to personally speak to a
chariot-maker. And apparently, a single chariot is an adequate military
build-up for war; a war that is, politely enough, scheduled precisely
six months in advance. The small scale and low stakes of this charming
story are a strong contrast with the elaborate and fanciful legends of
the Dīgha.

The chariot-maker completes the first wheel only six days before the
battle and is urged to rush the second one. But time matters: the first
wheel is well-formed and stable, while the second wobbles and crashes.
The Buddha then goes on to identify himself as the chariot-maker. This
too is remarkable, as it is one of the very few Jātaka stories in the
four *nikāyas*. The Buddha-to-be's humble station as a lowly
chariot-maker is unusual, as usually he is said to be a great king of
the past. It's also noteworthy that his commission is morally dubious:
he is an arms manufacturer. Later the Aṅguttara will say that trade in
arms is one of the forms of wrong livelihood ([AN
5.177](https://suttacentral.net/an5.177){.ref}). One might argue that a
chariot is not a weapon, but it is explicitly required as a war vehicle,
and today we would not hesitate to count, say, tanks or fighter jets as
weapons platforms. In the later Jātaka collection, it is not unusual for
the Bodhisatta to break precepts or commit various acts of dubious
morality; after all, the whole point is that he is not yet perfect.
Still, this adds to the striking impression of this little tale, so much
more down to earth and realistic than the other Jātakas in the
*nikāyas*.

[AN 3.16](https://suttacentral.net/an3.16){.ref} introduces the idea of
the "guaranteed practice", which consists of three of the elements of
the Gradual Training: sense restraint, eating in moderation, and
wakefulness. These implicitly call back to the very first chapter of the
Aṅguttara, here presented in a more standard form.

One of the Aṅguttara's characteristic rhetorical devices is to contrast
the worldly with the sacred; remember how [AN
2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10){.ref} spoke of the efforts of
the lay and the renunciant. [AN
3.19](https://suttacentral.net/an3.19){.ref} expands this theme,
comparing a shopkeeper who must work morning, noon, and night with a
mendicant who applies themselves to their meditation morning, noon, and
night. [AN 3.20](https://suttacentral.net/an3.20){.ref} applies the same
metaphor in a different way. These suttas cap off the first arc, which
deals with understanding the dangers of the world, and working to escape
from it.

The third chapter revisits the theme of "persons". It begins with a
discussion among some senior mendicants regarding who is best out of
three kinds of spiritually attained person; or in other words, who has
best implemented the practice encouraged in the first two chapters ([AN
3.21](https://suttacentral.net/an3.21){.ref}). An interesting comparison
is made between the treatment of illness and providing spiritual
assistance: you can't always help, but you should at least try ([AN
3.22](https://suttacentral.net/an3.22){.ref}).

Several suttas in the Threes share a pattern where the first item is a
foundation, the second is the realization of the four noble truths, and
the third is full awakening. This first appears at [AN
3.12](https://suttacentral.net/an3.12){.ref}, and is applied in
different ways in [AN 3.24](https://suttacentral.net/an3.24){.ref} and
[AN 3.25](https://suttacentral.net/an3.25){.ref}.

Returning to the theme of meditative immersion with which the entire
collection started, we are introduced to an intriguing teaching that
reappears multiple times in the Aṅguttara, but nowhere else in the canon
([AN 3.32](https://suttacentral.net/an3.32){.ref}, [AN
10.6](https://suttacentral.net/an10.6){.ref}, [AN
10.7](https://suttacentral.net/an10.7){.ref}, [AN
11.7](https://suttacentral.net/an11.7){.ref}, [AN
11.18](https://suttacentral.net/an11.18){.ref}--[AN
11.21](https://suttacentral.net/an11.21){.ref}). It begins with a
question: could it be that a mendicant might attain a state of immersion
that is free of all ego and conceit? Normally it is understood that the
meditative absorptions are shared between ordinary people and
enlightened beings on the path. The perfected ones are distinguished by
having let go the cause of suffering, not because they have attained
some special state of meditation. But these suttas, with their striking
note of wonder, imply that there is a special meditative state attained
only by the perfected ones.

This discourse is also distinguished by the fact that it finishes by
quoting a verse currently included in the Sutta Nipāta and even
correctly names the chapter, the "The Way to the Beyond". It is not at
all obvious that the verse was originally intended to refer to a state
of meditation. This shows that free and imaginative readings of suttas
were found even in the earliest times.

The next discourse ([AN 3.33](https://suttacentral.net/an3.33){.ref})
continues with the theme of going beyond ego and conceit, and it too
quotes from "The Way to the Beyond". But it starts with the Buddha in
what appears to be an uncharacteristically despondent mood, saying that
whether he teaches in brief or in detail---harking back to [AN
2.14](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20){.ref}---it's hard to find
anyone who understands.

[AN 3.35](https://suttacentral.net/an3.35){.ref} narrates a personal
encounter with a fellow by the name of Hatthaka, who came across the
Buddha meditating near his hometown of Āḷavī. He asks if the Buddha
slept well, considering the harshness of his outdoor living. The Buddha
replies that he is one of those who sleep well in the world, as he is
rid of the greed, hate, and delusion that disturb people in their sleep.

This is the second time this classic triad appears in the Threes. They
first appeared in the previous sutta, [AN
3.34](https://suttacentral.net/an3.34){.ref}, as the source of deeds,
and will recur in this sense in multiple suttas in this *nipāta*. Like
the triad of body, speech, and mind, they can be seen to exemplify the
2 + 1 pattern. Greed and hate are a codependent pair, the ugly
opposites. Delusion underlies them both; but at the same time, the
counterpart of delusion is wisdom, and it is through wisdom that
transcendence is possible.

This narrative mood ventures into mythology in the next discourse, which
gives the Buddhist account of the god Yama, lord of the dead. While one
might expect a death god to be fearsome, here he takes a decidedly
Buddhist approach to the afterlife. When the departed are brought to
Yama, he neither judges nor punishes. Rather, he asks the departed
whether he took heed of the messengers sent by the gods: an old person,
a sick person, and a corpse. These, of course, are three of the four
divine messengers seen by the Bodhisattva before he went forth
(canonically found in the life of Vipassī; see [DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14){.ref}). When the departed one replies
that he took no heed, Yama castigates him for his negligence and then
falls silent. The departed is dragged off to endure the sufferings of
hell, here recounted in a briefer form than [MN
129](https://suttacentral.net/mn129){.ref} and [MN
130](https://suttacentral.net/mn130){.ref}. Yama goes on to lament the
pitiful state of mortals, including himself and wishes he could be
reborn as a human and practice Buddhism.

The mythological mood continues in the next couple of suttas ([AN
3.37](https://suttacentral.net/an3.37){.ref}, [AN
3.38](https://suttacentral.net/an3.38){.ref}), which introduce a new
topic that will be very important for the Aṅguttara; namely, the
*uposatha* or "sabbath". This was a special "holy day" for religious
observance observed weekly or on certain special days. The ministers of
the Four Great Kings survey the earth on such days to see if people are
honoring their betters and doing good. If they are, they rejoice, for
they know that such people will be reborn in heaven to swell the hosts
of the gods, whereas if they are not they fear the hosts of the demons
will increase. This will of course have serious military implications in
the ongoing war between the two.

The next couple of suttas deal with renunciation, first as the Buddha's
recollection of his delicate upbringing ([AN
3.39](https://suttacentral.net/an3.39){.ref}), then as a reflection for
how a renunciate is to reflect with integrity on their choices ([AN
3.40](https://suttacentral.net/an3.40){.ref}). [AN
3.41](https://suttacentral.net/an3.41){.ref} and [AN
3.42](https://suttacentral.net/an3.42){.ref} look at the other side of
the coin, the qualities that make merit for a lay donor, especially
faith and generosity as well as the desire to learn. Learning is taken
up as the theme of the next two suttas ([AN
3.43](https://suttacentral.net/an3.43){.ref} and [AN
3.44](https://suttacentral.net/an3.44){.ref}). Then the themes of
generosity, faith, and the worthy spiritual life that make merit
fruitful are revisited ([AN
3.45](https://suttacentral.net/an3.45){.ref}, [AN
3.46](https://suttacentral.net/an3.46){.ref}, [AN
3.48](https://suttacentral.net/an3.48){.ref}). Mendicants are then urged
to be diligent ([AN 3.49](https://suttacentral.net/an3.49){.ref}) and
the nature of bad mendicants is disclosed ([AN
3.50](https://suttacentral.net/an3.50){.ref}). Taken together, this
series of 12 suttas can be read as a small thematic arc on the relation
between lay folk and renunciants, the need for both to have integrity
and the proper sense of values in their sphere, and the mutual support
of each other through generosity with material things and of teachings.

Next begins a new *vagga*, "On Brahmins", which as one might expect,
depicts the Buddha in conversation with brahmins. In [AN
3.51](https://suttacentral.net/an3.51){.ref} and [AN
3.52](https://suttacentral.net/an3.52){.ref}, the Buddha is approached
by two brahmins, who confess that they have not lived a good life, and
now, in their dotage, seek for help. The Buddha acknowledges the brevity
of life and urges restraint of body, speech, and mind. [AN
3.53](https://suttacentral.net/an3.53){.ref} has the Buddha speaking to
another brahmin on how the Dhamma is to be realized in this very life.
He gives a similar teaching to a wanderer ([AN
3.54](https://suttacentral.net/an3.54){.ref}) and to the brahmin
Jāṇussoṇi ([AN 3.55](https://suttacentral.net/an3.55){.ref}). That the
Buddha's teaching may be realized in this life is a stock characteristic
of the Dhamma (*sandiṭṭhiko akāliko*), but it is easy to overlook how
directly this was a rebuke of pre-existing religious traditions. They
looked forward to rewards in the future---whether a heavenly rebirth or
the eventual annihilation of suffering---but the Buddha, while not
denying the reality and importance of future fruits, refocused spiritual
life on the present.

[AN 3.56](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56){.ref} gives a different kind
of teaching to a brahmin. In a message with a special poignancy in our
troubled times, the Buddha explains why civilizations collapse, namely,
unbridled greed. In [AN 3.57](https://suttacentral.net/an3.57){.ref} the
Buddha refutes the wanderer Vacchagotta's accusation that he only
encourages giving to his followers. When the brahmin Tikaṇṇa
("Three-ear") praises true brahmins, the Buddha responds with his
redefinition of a brahmin, rejecting the value of birth and Vedic
learning, and giving the second part of the Gradual Training, starting
with the absorptions ([AN 3.58](https://suttacentral.net/an3.58){.ref};
[AN 3.59](https://suttacentral.net/an3.59){.ref} is similar). In [AN
3.60](https://suttacentral.net/an3.60){.ref}, the Buddha not only
rejects the value of the Vedic sacrifice, but he also shows that by
teaching Dhamma one can benefit many more people.

The seventh *vagga* is titled the "Great Chapter", and it introduces a
series of discourses on a larger scale. It begins with a thematic segue;
[AN 3.61](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61){.ref} continues the theme of
the relation between Buddhist and non-Buddhist theories, but it does so
as a straight doctrinal discourse to the mendicants, rather than as an
interfaith dialogue. This magnificent discourse offers an important
framing of dependent origination and it deserves detailed study. This
Great Chapter is unified by the length of the sutta rather than by
subject; however several other suttas deal with non-Buddhist philosophy
and relations ([AN 3.64](https://suttacentral.net/an3.64){.ref}, [AN
3.68](https://suttacentral.net/an3.68){.ref}, [AN
3.70](https://suttacentral.net/an3.70){.ref}), including the famous
Kālāma Sutta ([AN 3.65](https://suttacentral.net/an3.65){.ref}; also [AN
3.66](https://suttacentral.net/an3.66){.ref}).

Here I will end my analysis, as I think enough examples have been given
to illustrate both the connectedness and the chaos of this collection.
Hopefully, the reader can find their way from here, and not feel so
bewildered by the sudden shifts and changes they encounter.

## A Brief Textual History {#introduction.xhtml_intro-item5}

The Aṅguttara Nikāya was edited by R. Morris (vols. 1 and 2) and E.
Hardy (vols 3--5) based on manuscripts in Sinhalese and Burmese scripts;
Hardy also made use of the then recently-published royal Thai edition.
It was published in Latin script by the Pali Text Society from 1885 to
1900. Indexes by M. Hunt and Mrs. C.A.F. Rhys Davids were added in 1910.
The first translation followed in 1932--36 by F.L. Woodward (vols. 1, 2,
and 5) and E.M. Hare (vols. 3 and 4) under the title
`<cite class="book">`{=html}The Book of the Gradual
Sayings`</cite>`{=html}.

As was the case with the Majjhima and Saṁyutta, several disparate
individual suttas from the Aṅguttara were published in book form or the
web. However, a complete new translation had to wait for Bhikkhu Bodhi
to complete his work on the Saṁyutta Nikāya. As described in the
introduction to his translation, in the late 1990s Bhikkhu Bodhi
collected Nyanaponika Thera's four-part series of Wheel booklets into a
single volume for the International Sacred Literature Trust as
`<cite class="book">`{=html}An Aṅguttara Nikāya
Anthology`</cite>`{=html}. He then added sixty more suttas and published
a total of 208 suttas as `<cite class="book">`{=html}The Numerical
Discourses of the Buddha: An Anthology of Suttas from the Aṅguttara
Nikāya`</cite>`{=html} with AltaMira Press in 1999. In 2012 he completed
the full translation, which was published as
`<cite class="book">`{=html}The Numerical Discourses of the
Buddha`</cite>`{=html} through Wisdom Publications. His Introduction was
even more extensive than his previous works; less technical than the
Saṁyutta introduction, the bulk of it focused on an overview of the
teachings found in the Aṅguttara. As with his previous translations,
this work constituted a major leap forward in accuracy and readability,
introducing the Aṅguttara to a new generation.

Where the Pali was unclear I frequently referred to the earlier work of
Bodhi, and rarely to Woodward/Hare and various translations of specific
texts. An article by Tse-fu Kuan ([關則富]{lang="lzh"
translate="no"})---`<cite>`{=html}Some Reflections on Translating the
Pali Texts: Literary Conventions, Buddhist Thought, Cultural Background
and Textual History`</cite>`{=html}, 2019, Acta Orientalia Academiae
Scientiarum Hungaricae, vol. 72 (1), pp. 1--23---provided helpful
corrections in several passages.

</article>

[]{#acknowledgements.xhtml}

<article class="acknowledgements" id="acknowledgements">

# Acknowledgements

I remember with gratitude all those from whom I have learned the Dhamma,
especially Ajahn Brahm and Bhikkhu Bodhi, the two monks who more than
anyone else showed me the depth, meaning, and practical value of the
Suttas.

Special thanks to Dustin and Keiko Cheah and family, who sponsored my
stay in Qi Mei while I made this translation.

Thanks also for Blake Walshe, who provided essential software support
for my translation work.

Throughout the process of translation, I have frequently sought feedback
and suggestions from the SuttaCentral community on our forum, "Discuss
and Discover". I want to thank all those who have made suggestions and
contributed to my understanding, as well as to the moderators who have
made the forum possible. These translations were significantly improved
due to the careful work of my proofreaders: Ayyā Pāsādā, John and Lynn
Kelly, and Derek Sola. Special thanks are due to Sabbamittā, a true
friend of all, who has tirelessly and precisely checked my work.

Finally my everlasting thanks to all those people, far too many to
mention, who have supported SuttaCentral, and those who have supported
my life as a monastic. None of this would be possible without you.

</article>

[]{#an1.xhtml}

# The Book of the Ones {#an1.xhtml_an1 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an1-cittapariyadanavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on What Occupies the Mind {#an1-cittapariyadanavagga.xhtml_an1-cittapariyadanavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-cittapariyadanavagga.xhtml_an1.1-10 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.1--10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on What Occupies the Mind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cittapariyādānavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.1">

##### 1 {.sutta-title .subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a man's mind like
the sight of a woman. The sight of a woman occupies a man's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.2">

##### 2 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a man's mind like
the sound of a woman. The sound of a woman occupies a man's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.3">

##### 3 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a man's mind like
the smell of a woman. The smell of a woman occupies a man's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.4">

##### 4 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a man's mind like
the taste of a woman. The taste of a woman occupies a man's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.5">

##### 5 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a man's mind like
the touch of a woman. The touch of a woman occupies a man's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.6">

##### 6 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a woman's mind
like the sight of a man. The sight of a man occupies a woman's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.7">

##### 7 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a woman's mind
like the sound of a man. The sound of a man occupies a woman's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.8">

##### 8 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a woman's mind
like the smell of a man. The smell of a man occupies a woman's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.9">

##### 9 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a woman's mind
like the taste of a man. The taste of a man occupies a woman's mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.10">

##### 10 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a woman's mind
like the touch of a man. The touch of a man occupies a woman's mind."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-nivaranappahanavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Giving Up the Hindrances {#an1-nivaranappahanavagga.xhtml_an1-nivaranappahanavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-nivaranappahanavagga.xhtml_an1.11-20 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.11--20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Giving Up the Hindrances ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nīvaraṇappahānavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.11">

##### 11 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to sensual
desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the
feature of beauty. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature
of beauty, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it increases and
grows."

</article>
<article id="an1.12">

##### 12 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to ill will,
or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the feature of
harshness. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of
harshness, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases and grows."

</article>
<article id="an1.13">

##### 13 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to dullness and
drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental
sluggishness. When you have a sluggish mind, dullness and drowsiness
arise, and once arisen they increase and grow."

</article>
<article id="an1.14">

##### 14 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to restlessness
and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow
like an unsettled mind. When you have no peace of mind, restlessness and
remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow."

</article>
<article id="an1.15">

##### 15 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to doubt, or,
when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like irrational
application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally, doubt arises,
and once arisen it increases and grows."

</article>
<article id="an1.16">

##### 16 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents sensual desire
from arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the feature of
ugliness. When you apply the mind rationally to the feature of ugliness,
sensual desire does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it's given
up."

</article>
<article id="an1.17">

##### 17 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents ill will from
arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the heart's release by
love. When you apply the mind rationally on the heart's release by love,
ill will does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it's given up."

</article>
<article id="an1.18">

##### 18 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents dullness and
drowsiness from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like
the elements of initiative, persistence, and vigor. When you're
energetic, dullness and drowsiness do not arise, or, if they've already
arisen, they're given up."

</article>
<article id="an1.19">

##### 19 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents restlessness and
remorse from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like
peace of mind. When your mind is peaceful, restlessness and remorse do
not arise, or, if they've already arisen, they're given up."

</article>
<article id="an1.20">

##### 20 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents doubt from
arising, or, when it has arisen, gives it up like rational application
of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, doubt does not arise, or,
if it's already arisen, it's given up."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-akammaniyavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on the Useless Mind {#an1-akammaniyavagga.xhtml_an1-akammaniyavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-akammaniyavagga.xhtml_an1.21-30 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.21--30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [3. Unworkable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akammaniyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.21">

##### 21 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
like this, is as unworkable as the mind. An undeveloped mind is
unworkable."

</article>
<article id="an1.22">

##### 22 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like
this, is as workable as the mind. A developed mind is workable."

</article>
<article id="an1.23">

##### 23 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
like this, is so very harmful as the mind. An undeveloped mind is very
harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.24">

##### 24 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like
this, is so very beneficial as the mind. A developed mind is very
beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.25">

##### 25 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed,
with such untapped potential, is so very harmful as the mind. An
undeveloped mind, with untapped potential, is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.26">

##### 26 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed,
with its potential realized, is so very beneficial as the mind. A
developed mind, with its potential realized, is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.27">

##### 27 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
and cultivated, is so very harmful as the mind. An undeveloped and
uncultivated mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.28">

##### 28 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and
cultivated, is so very beneficial as the mind. A developed and
cultivated mind is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.29">

##### 29 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
and cultivated, brings such suffering as the mind. An undeveloped and
uncultivated mind brings suffering."

</article>
<article id="an1.30">

##### 30 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and
cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind. A developed and
cultivated mind brings happiness."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-adantavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on the Wild Mind {#an1-adantavagga.xhtml_an1-adantavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-adantavagga.xhtml_an1.31-40 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.31--40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [4. Wild ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adantavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.31">

##### 31 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not tamed, is
so very harmful as the mind. A wild mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.32">

##### 32 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, is so
very beneficial as the mind. A tamed mind is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.33">

##### 33 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not guarded, is
so very harmful as the mind. An unguarded mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.34">

##### 34 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is guarded, is so
very beneficial as the mind. A guarded mind is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.35">

##### 35 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not protected,
is so very harmful as the mind. An unprotected mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.36">

##### 36 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is protected, is
so very beneficial as the mind. A protected mind is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.37">

##### 37 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not restrained,
is so very harmful as the mind. An unrestrained mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.38">

##### 38 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is restrained, is
so very beneficial as the mind. A restrained mind is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.39">

##### 39 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is not tamed,
guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. An
untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained mind is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.40">

##### 40 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed,
guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. A
tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained mind is very beneficial."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-panihitaacchavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on a Spike {#an1-panihitaacchavagga.xhtml_an1-panihitaacchavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-panihitaacchavagga.xhtml_an1.41-50 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.41--50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on a Spike ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṇihitaacchavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.41">

##### 41 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it is impossible for it to
break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is
pointing the wrong way. In the same way, it is quite impossible for a
mendicant whose mind is pointing the wrong way to break ignorance,
produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because
their mind is pointing the wrong way."

</article>
<article id="an1.42">

##### 42 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the
skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the
right way. In the same way, it is quite possible for a mendicant whose
mind is pointing the right way to break ignorance, produce knowledge,
and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because the mind is pointing
the right way."

</article>
<article id="an1.43">

##### 43 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
corrupted, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they
would be cast down to hell.' Why is that? Because their mind is
corrupted. Corruption of mind is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an1.44">

##### 44 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
pure, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they would be
raised up to heaven.' Why is that? Because their mind is pure. Purity of
mind is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

</article>
<article id="an1.45">

##### 45 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was cloudy, murky, and
muddy. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would not see the
clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming
about or staying still. Why is that? Because the water is clouded. In
the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is clouded would know what's
for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that
they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones: this is quite impossible. Why is that? Because
their mind is clouded."

</article>
<article id="an1.46">

##### 46 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and
unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the
clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming
about or staying still. Why is that? Because the water is unclouded. In
the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is not clouded would know
what's for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or
that they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones: this is quite possible. Why is that?
Because their mind is unclouded."

</article>
<article id="an1.47">

##### 47 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Just as, mendicants, the boxwood is said to be the best kind of tree in
terms of its pliability and workability, so too, I do not see a single
thing that's as pliable and workable as the mind, when it is developed
and cultivated. A mind that is developed and cultivated is pliable and
workable."

</article>
<article id="an1.48">

##### 48 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that's as quick to change as
the mind. So much so that it's not easy to give a simile for how quickly
the mind changes."

</article>
<article id="an1.49">

##### 49 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. But it's corrupted by passing
corruptions."

</article>
<article id="an1.50">

##### 50 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. And it is freed from passing
corruptions."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-accharasanghatavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on a Finger-Snap {#an1-accharasanghatavagga.xhtml_an1-accharasanghatavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-accharasanghatavagga.xhtml_an1.51-60 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.51--60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on a Finger-Snap ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Accharāsaṅghātavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.51">

##### 51 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. But it is corrupted by passing
corruptions. An unlearned ordinary person does not truly understand
this. So I say that the unlearned ordinary person has no development of
the mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.52">

##### 52 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. And it is freed from passing
corruptions. A learned noble disciple truly understands this. So I say
that the learned noble disciple has development of the mind."

</article>
<article id="an1.53">

##### 53 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant cultivates a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

</article>
<article id="an1.54">

##### 54 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

</article>
<article id="an1.55">

##### 55 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant focuses on a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

</article>
<article id="an1.56">

##### 56 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are
unskillful, part of the unskillful, on the side of the unskillful.
Intention is the first of those phenomena to arise, and unskillful
phenomena follow right behind."

</article>
<article id="an1.57">

##### 57 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are
skillful, part of the skillful, on the side of the skillful. Intention
is the first of those phenomena to arise, and skillful phenomena follow
right behind."

</article>
<article id="an1.58">

##### 58 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like negligence. When
you're negligent, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.59">

##### 59 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like diligence. When
you're diligent, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.60">

##### 60 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like laziness. When
you're lazy, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-viriyarambhadivagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Arousing Energy {#an1-viriyarambhadivagga.xhtml_an1-viriyarambhadivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-viriyarambhadivagga.xhtml_an1.61-70 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.61--70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Arousing Energy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vīriyārambhādivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.61">

##### 61 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like arousing energy.
When you're energetic, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.62">

##### 62 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like having many wishes.
When you have many wishes, unskillful qualities arise and skillful
qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.63">

##### 63 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like having few wishes.
When you have few wishes, skillful qualities arise and unskillful
qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.64">

##### 64 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of contentment.
When you lack contentment, unskillful qualities arise and skillful
qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.65">

##### 65 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like contentment. When
you're contented, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.66">

##### 66 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like irrational
application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally, unskillful
qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.67">

##### 67 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like rational
application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, skillful
qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.68">

##### 68 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of situational
awareness. When you lack situational awareness, unskillful qualities
arise and skillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.69">

##### 69 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like situational
awareness. When you have situational awareness, skillful qualities arise
and unskillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.70">

##### 70 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like bad friends. When
you have bad friends, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-kalyanamittadivagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Good Friends {#an1-kalyanamittadivagga.xhtml_an1-kalyanamittadivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-kalyanamittadivagga.xhtml_an1.71-81 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.71--81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [8. Good Friends ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kalyāṇamittādivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.71">

##### 71 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like good friends. When
you have good friends, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.72">

##### 72 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like pursuing bad habits
and not good habits. When you pursue bad habits and not good habits,
unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.73">

##### 73 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like pursuing good
habits and not bad habits. When you pursue good habits and not bad
habits, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.74">

##### 74 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents the awakening
factors from arising, or, if they've already arisen, prevents them from
being fully developed like irrational application of mind. When you
apply the mind irrationally, the awakening factors don't arise, or, if
they've already arisen, they're not fully developed."

</article>
<article id="an1.75">

##### 75 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the
awakening factors, or, if they've already arisen, fully develops them
like rational application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally,
the awakening factors arise, or, if they've already arisen, they're
fully developed."

</article>
<article id="an1.76">

##### 76 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Loss of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst
thing to lose."

</article>
<article id="an1.77">

##### 77 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Growth of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best
thing to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

</article>
<article id="an1.78">

##### 78 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Loss of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst thing
to lose."

</article>
<article id="an1.79">

##### 79 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Growth of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best
thing to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

</article>
<article id="an1.80">

##### 80 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Loss of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst thing
to lose."

</article>
<article id="an1.81">

##### 81 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Growth of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best thing
to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-pamadadivagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Negligence {#an1-pamadadivagga.xhtml_an1-pamadadivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-pamadadivagga.xhtml_an1.82-97 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.82--97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [9. Negligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pamādādivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.82">

##### 82 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
negligence. Negligence is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.83">

##### 83 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
diligence. Diligence is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.84">

##### 84 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
laziness. Laziness is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.85">

##### 85 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
arousing energy. Arousing energy is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.86">

##### 86 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
having many wishes. Having many wishes is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.87">

##### 87 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
having few wishes. Having few wishes is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.88">

##### 88 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack
of contentment. Lack of contentment is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.89">

##### 89 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
contentment. Contentment is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.90">

##### 90 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
irrational application of mind. Irrational application of mind is very
harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.91">

##### 91 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
rational application of mind. Rational application of mind is very
beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.92">

##### 92 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack
of situational awareness. Lack of situational awareness is very
harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.93">

##### 93 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
situational awareness. Situational awareness is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.94">

##### 94 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as bad
friends. Bad friends are very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.95">

##### 95 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
good friends. Good friends are very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.96">

##### 96 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
pursuing bad habits and not good habits. Pursuing bad habits and not
good habits is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.97">

##### 97 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
pursuing good habits and not bad habits. Pursuing good habits and not
bad habits is very beneficial."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-dutiyapamadadivagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Negligence (2nd) {#an1-dutiyapamadadivagga.xhtml_an1-dutiyapamadadivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-dutiyapamadadivagga.xhtml_an1.98-139 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.98--139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Negligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapamādādivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.98">

##### 98 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as negligence. Negligence is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.99">

##### 99 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as diligence. Diligence is very
beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.100">

##### 100 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as laziness. Laziness is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.101">

##### 101 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as arousing energy. Arousing energy is
very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.102-109">

##### 102--109 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as having many wishes ... having few wishes
... lack of contentment ... contentment ... irrational application of
mind ... rational application of mind ... lack of situational awareness
... situational awareness ..."

</article>
<article id="an1.110">

##### 110 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as bad friends. Bad friends are very
harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.111">

##### 111 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as good friends. Good friends are very
beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.112">

##### 112 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as pursuing bad habits and not good habits.
Pursuing bad habits and not good habits is very harmful."

</article>
<article id="an1.113">

##### 113 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as pursuing good habits and not bad
habits. Pursuing good habits and not bad habits is very beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an1.114">

##### 114 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like negligence. Negligence leads to
the decline and disappearance of the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an1.115">

##### 115 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like diligence. Diligence
leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an1.116">

##### 116 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like laziness. Laziness leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an1.117">

##### 117 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like arousing energy.
Arousing energy leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an1.118-128">

##### 118--128 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like having many wishes ... having
few wishes ... lack of contentment ... contentment ... irrational
application of mind ... rational application of mind ... lack of
situational awareness ... situational awareness ... bad friends ... good
friends ... pursuing bad habits and not good habits. Pursuing bad habits
and not good habits leads to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an1.129">

##### 129 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like pursuing good habits
and not bad habits. Pursuing good habits and not bad habits leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching"

</article>
<article id="an1.130">

##### 130 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as
the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear."

</article>
<article id="an1.131">

##### 131 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as not
the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear."

</article>
<article id="an1.132-139">

##### 132--139 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as
found in the monastic law ... what is found in the monastic law as not
found in the monastic law ... what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One ... what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the
Realized One ... what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced
by the Realized One ... what was practiced by the Realized One as not
practiced by the Realized One ... what was not prescribed by the
Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One ... what was prescribed
by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One are acting for
the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the
harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. They create much
wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-adhammavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Not the Teaching {#an1-adhammavagga.xhtml_an1-adhammavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-adhammavagga.xhtml_an1.140-149 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.140--149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Not the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhammavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.140">

##### 140 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as
not the teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people,
for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans. They create much merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
<article id="an1.141">

##### 141 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as the
teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the
people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They
create much merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
<article id="an1.142-149">

##### 142--149 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as
not found in the monastic law ... what is found in the monastic law as
found in the monastic law ... what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One ... what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the
Realized One ... what was not practiced by the Realized One as not
practiced by the Realized One ... what was practiced by the Realized One
as practiced by the Realized One ... what was not prescribed by the
Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One ... what was
prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One ... are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-anapattivagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Non-offense {#an1-anapattivagga.xhtml_an1-anapattivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-anapattivagga.xhtml_an1.150-169 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.150--169]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Non-offense ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anāpattivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.150">

##### 150 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as an offense are
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. They
create much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

</article>
<article id="an1.151">

##### 151 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as non-offense are
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. Those
mendicants create much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

</article>
<article id="an1.152-159">

##### 152--159 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a serious offense ... a
serious offense as a light offense ... an offense committed with corrupt
intention as an offense not committed with corrupt intention ... an
offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense committed
with corrupt intention ... an offense requiring rehabilitation as an
offense not requiring rehabilitation ... an offense not requiring
rehabilitation as an offense requiring rehabilitation ... an offense
with redress as an offense without redress ... an offense without
redress as an offense with redress are acting for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. Those mendicants create much
wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

</article>
<article id="an1.160">

##### 160 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as non-offense are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
<article id="an1.161">

##### 161 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as an offense are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
<article id="an1.162-169">

##### 162--169 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a light offense ... a
serious offense as a serious offense ... an offense committed with
corrupt intention as an offense committed with corrupt intention ... an
offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense not committed
with corrupt intention ... an offense requiring rehabilitation as an
offense requiring rehabilitation ... an offense not requiring
rehabilitation as an offense not requiring rehabilitation ... an offense
with redress as an offense with redress ... an offense without redress
as an offense without redress are acting for the welfare and happiness
of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans. They create much merit and make the true teaching
continue."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-ekapuggalavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on One Person {#an1-ekapuggalavagga.xhtml_an1-ekapuggalavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-ekapuggalavagga.xhtml_an1.170-187 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.170--187]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on One Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ekapuggalavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.170">

##### 170 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. What one person? The Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is the one
person, mendicants, who arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an1.171">

##### 171 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"The appearance of one person, mendicants, is rare in the world. What
one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, whose appearance is rare in
the world."

</article>
<article id="an1.172">

##### 172 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world who is an incredible human
being. What one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, who arises in the
world who is an incredible human being."

</article>
<article id="an1.173">

##### 173 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"The death of one person, mendicants, is regretted by many people. What
one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, whose death is regretted by
many people."

</article>
<article id="an1.174">

##### 174 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world unique, without peer or
counterpart, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without
equal, the best of men. What one person? The Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, who
arises in the world unique, without peer or counterpart, incomparable,
matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the best of men."

</article>
<article id="an1.175-186">

##### 175--186 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"With the appearance of one person, mendicants, there is the appearance
of a great eye, a great light, a great radiance, and the six
unsurpassable things; the realization of the four kinds of textual
analysis; the penetration of many and diverse elements; the realization
of the fruit of knowledge and freedom; the realization of the fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. What one person?
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is
the one person whose appearance brings the appearance of a great eye, a
great light, a great radiance, and the six unsurpassable things; the
realization of the four kinds of textual analysis; the penetration of
many and diverse elements; the realization of the fruit of knowledge and
release; the realization of the fruits of stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and perfection."

</article>
<article id="an1.187">

##### 187 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single other person who rightly keeps
rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One like Sāriputta. Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme
Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml}

## Seven Chapters on the Foremost Persons {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1-etadaggavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.188-197 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.188--197]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.188">

"The foremost of my monk disciples in seniority is Koṇḍañña Who
Understood.

</article>
<article id="an1.189">

... with great wisdom is Sāriputta.

</article>
<article id="an1.190">

... with psychic power is Mahāmoggallāna.

</article>
<article id="an1.191">

... who advocate austerities is Mahākassapa.

</article>
<article id="an1.192">

... with clairvoyance is Anuruddha.

</article>
<article id="an1.193">

... from eminent families is Bhaddiya son of Kāḷīgodhā.

</article>
<article id="an1.194">

... with a charming voice is Bhaddiya the Dwarf.

</article>
<article id="an1.195">

... with a lion's roar is Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer.

</article>
<article id="an1.196">

... who speak on the teaching is Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī.

</article>
<article id="an1.197">

... who explain in detail the meaning of a brief statement is
Mahākaccāna."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.198-208 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.198--208]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Two ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.198">

"The foremost of my monk disciples in creating a mind-made body is
Cūḷapanthaka.

</article>
<article id="an1.199">

... who are skilled in the evolution of consciousness is Cūḷapanthaka.

</article>
<article id="an1.200">

... who are skilled in the evolution of perception is Mahāpanthaka.

</article>
<article id="an1.201">

... who live without conflict is Subhūti.

</article>
<article id="an1.202">

... who are worthy of a religious donation is Subhūti.

</article>
<article id="an1.203">

... who stay in the wilderness is Revata of the Acacia Wood.

</article>
<article id="an1.204">

... who practice absorption is Revata the Doubter.

</article>
<article id="an1.205">

... who are energetic is Soṇa Koḷivisa.

</article>
<article id="an1.206">

... who are good speakers is Soṇa of the Sharp Ears.

</article>
<article id="an1.207">

... who receive many possessions is Sīvali.

</article>
<article id="an1.208">

... who are committed to faith is Vakkalī."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.209-218 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.209--218]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Three ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.209">

"The foremost of my monk disciples who want to train is Rāhula.

</article>
<article id="an1.210">

... who went forth out of faith is Raṭṭhapāla.

</article>
<article id="an1.211">

... who are the first to pick up a ballot slip is Kuṇḍadhāna.

</article>
<article id="an1.212">

... who are eloquent poets is Vaṅgīsa.

</article>
<article id="an1.213">

... who are impressive all around is Upasena son of Vaṅgantā.

</article>
<article id="an1.214">

... who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta.

</article>
<article id="an1.215">

... who are beloved of the deities is Pilindavaccha.

</article>
<article id="an1.216">

... with swift insight is Bāhiya of the Bark Cloth.

</article>
<article id="an1.217">

... with brilliant speech is Kassapa the Prince.

</article>
<article id="an1.218">

... who have attained the methods of textual analysis is Mahākoṭṭhita."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.219-234 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.219--234]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Four ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.219">

"The foremost of my monk disciples who are very learned is Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.220">

... with a good memory is Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.221">

... with an extensive range is Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.222">

... in retention is Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.223">

... as a personal attendant is Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.224">

... with a large congregation is Kassapa of Uruvelā.

</article>
<article id="an1.225">

... who inspire lay families is Kāḷudāyī.

</article>
<article id="an1.226">

... with good health is Bakkula.

</article>
<article id="an1.227">

... who recollect past lives is Sobhita.

</article>
<article id="an1.228">

... who have memorized the monastic law is Upāli.

</article>
<article id="an1.229">

... who advise the nuns is Nandaka.

</article>
<article id="an1.230">

... who guard the sense doors is Nanda.

</article>
<article id="an1.231">

... who advise the monks is Mahākappina.

</article>
<article id="an1.232">

... who are skilled in the fire element is Sāgata.

</article>
<article id="an1.233">

... who inspire eloquent teachings is Rādha.

</article>
<article id="an1.234">

... who wear coarse robes is Mogharājā."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.235-247 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.235--247]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Five ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcamavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.235">

"The foremost of my nun disciples in seniority is Mahāpajāpati Gotamī.

</article>
<article id="an1.236">

... with great wisdom is Khemā.

</article>
<article id="an1.237">

... with psychic power is Uppalavaṇṇā.

</article>
<article id="an1.238">

... who have memorized the monastic law is Paṭācārā.

</article>
<article id="an1.239">

... who speak on the teaching is Dhammadinnā.

</article>
<article id="an1.240">

... who practice absorption is Nandā.

</article>
<article id="an1.241">

... who are energetic is Soṇā.

</article>
<article id="an1.242">

... with clairvoyance is Sakulā.

</article>
<article id="an1.243">

... with swift insight is Bhaddā of the Curly Hair.

</article>
<article id="an1.244">

... who recollect past lives is Bhaddā daughter of Kapila.

</article>
<article id="an1.245">

... who have attained great insight is Bhaddakaccānā.

</article>
<article id="an1.246">

... who wear coarse robes is Kisāgotamī.

</article>
<article id="an1.247">

... who are committed to faith is Siṅgāla's Mother."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-etadaggavagga.xhtml_an1.248-257 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.248--257]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Six ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chaṭṭhavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.248">

"The foremost of my laymen in first going for refuge are the merchants
Tapussa and Bhallika.

</article>
<article id="an1.249">

... as a donor is the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika.

</article>
<article id="an1.250">

... who speak on the teaching is the householder Citta Macchikāsaṇḍika.

</article>
<article id="an1.251">

... who attract a congregation by the four ways of being inclusive is
Hatthaka of Āḷavī.

</article>
<article id="an1.252">

... who donate fine things is Mahānāma Sakka.

</article>
<article id="an1.253">

... who donate nice things is the householder Ugga of Vesālī.

</article>
<article id="an1.254">

... who attend on the Saṅgha is the householder Uggata of Elephant
Village.

</article>
<article id="an1.255">

... who have experiential confidence is Sūrambaṭṭha.

</article>
<article id="an1.256">

... who have confidence in a person is Jīvaka Komārabhacca.

</article>
<article id="an1.257">

... who are intimate is the householder Nakula's father."

</article>
:::

<article id="an1.258-267">

#### [AN 1.258--267]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Seven ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattamavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

"The foremost of my laywomen in first going for refuge is Sujātā the
general's daughter.

... as a donor is Visākhā, Migāra's mother.

... who are very learned is Khujjuttarā.

... who dwell in love is Sāmāvatī.

... who practice absorption is Uttarānanda's mother.

... who give fine things is Suppavāsā the Koliyan.

... who care for the sick is the laywoman Suppiyā.

... who have experiential confidence is Kātiyānī.

... who are intimate is the householder Nakula's mother.

... whose confidence is based on oral transmission is the laywoman Kāḷī
of Kuraraghara."

</article>

[]{#an1-atthana.xhtml}

## Three Chapters on the Impossible {#an1-atthana.xhtml_an1-atthana .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-atthana.xhtml_an1.268-277 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.268--277]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.268">

##### 268 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not
possible. But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some
condition as permanent. That is possible."

</article>
<article id="an1.269">

##### 269 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take any condition as pleasant. But it is
possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as pleasant."

</article>
<article id="an1.270">

##### 270 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take anything as self. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to take something as self."

</article>
<article id="an1.271">

##### 271 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder their mother. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to murder their mother."

</article>
<article id="an1.272">

##### 272 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder their father. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to murder their father."

</article>
<article id="an1.273">

##### 273 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder a perfected one. But it is possible for
an ordinary person to murder a perfected one."

</article>
<article id="an1.274">

##### 274 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent. But
it is possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with
malicious intent."

</article>
<article id="an1.275">

##### 275 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to cause a schism in the Saṅgha. But it is possible
for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the Saṅgha."

</article>
<article id="an1.276">

##### 276 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to dedicate themselves to another teacher. But it
is possible for an ordinary person to dedicate themselves to another
teacher."

</article>
<article id="an1.277">

##### 277 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two perfected ones,
fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same
time. But it is possible for just one perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, to arise in one solar system."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-atthana.xhtml_an1.278-286 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.278--286]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Two ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.278">

##### 278 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two wheel-turning
monarchs to arise in the same solar system at the same time. But it is
possible for just one wheel-turning monarch to arise in one solar
system."

</article>
<article id="an1.279">

##### 279 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. But it is possible for a man to
be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha."

</article>
<article id="an1.280">

##### 280 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a
wheel-turning monarch. But it is possible for a man to be a
wheel-turning monarch."

</article>
<article id="an1.281-283">

##### 281--283 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to perform
the role of Sakka, Māra, or Brahmā. But it is possible for a man to
perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or Brahmā."

</article>
<article id="an1.284">

##### 284 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable,
desirable, agreeable result to come from bad bodily conduct. But it is
possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from
bad bodily conduct."

</article>
<article id="an1.285-286">

##### 285--286 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable,
desirable, agreeable result to come from bad verbal ... bad mental
conduct. But it is possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable
result to come from bad verbal ... bad mental conduct."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-atthana.xhtml_an1.287-295 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.287--295]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Three ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.287">

##### 287 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable,
undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good bodily conduct. But
it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from
good bodily conduct."

</article>
<article id="an1.288-289">

##### 288--289 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable,
undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good verbal ... good
mental conduct. But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable
result to come from good verbal ... good mental conduct."

</article>
<article id="an1.290">

##### 290 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in bad bodily conduct, could for that reason alone, when their
body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad bodily
conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after
death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an1.291-292">

##### 291--292 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in bad verbal ... bad mental conduct could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. But it is possible that someone who has engaged
in bad verbal ... bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an1.293">

##### 293 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their
body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. But it is possible that someone who has engaged in
good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks
up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

</article>
<article id="an1.294-295">

##### 294--295 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in good verbal ... good mental conduct could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But it is possible that someone
who has engaged in good verbal ... good mental conduct could, for that
reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a
good place, heavenly realm."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml}

## Four Chapters on One Thing {#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml_an1-ekadhamma .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml_an1.296-305 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.296--305]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.296">

##### 296 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. What one thing? Recollection of the Buddha. This one
thing, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an1.297-305">

##### 297--305 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. What one thing? Recollection of the teaching ...
Recollection of the Saṅgha ... Recollection of ethical conduct ...
Recollection of generosity ... Recollection of the deities ...
Mindfulness of breathing ... Mindfulness of death ... Mindfulness of the
body ... Recollection of peace. This one thing, when developed and
cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml_an1.306-315 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.306--315]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Two ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.306">

##### 306 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
wrong view. When you have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise or,
when they have arisen, they increase and grow."

</article>
<article id="an1.307">

##### 307 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
right view. When you have right view, unarisen skillful qualities arise
or, when they have arisen, they increase and grow."

</article>
<article id="an1.308">

##### 308 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like wrong view. When you
have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.309">

##### 309 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like right view. When
you have right view, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

</article>
<article id="an1.310">

##### 310 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to wrong view,
and once arisen, makes it grow like irrational application of mind. When
you apply the mind irrationally, wrong view arises, and once arisen it
grows."

</article>
<article id="an1.311">

##### 311 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to right view,
or, once it has already arisen, makes it grow like rational application
of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, right view arises, and once
arisen it grows."

</article>
<article id="an1.312">

##### 312 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to
be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell like wrong view. It is because they have
wrong view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an1.313">

##### 313 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to
be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a good place, a
heavenly realm like right view. It is because they have right view that
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm."

</article>
<article id="an1.314">

##### 314 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when an individual has wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal,
or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions,
aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable,
disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. Why is that? Because their view is
bad. Suppose a seed of neem, angled gourd, or bitter gourd was planted
in moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its bitter, acerbic, and unpleasant taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is bad. In the same way, when an individual has wrong
view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering.
Why is that? Because their view is bad."

</article>
<article id="an1.315">

##### 315 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when an individual has right view, whatever bodily, verbal,
or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions,
aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is likable, desirable,
agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is that? Because their view is
good. Suppose a seed of sugar cane, fine rice, or grape was planted in
moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its sweet, pleasant, and delicious taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is good. In the same way, when an individual has right
view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is
that? Because their view is good."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml_an1.316-332 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.316--332]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Three ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.316">

##### 316 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. What one person? Someone with wrong
view, whose perspective is distorted. They draw many people away from
the true teaching and establish them in false teachings. This is one
person who arises in the world for the detriment and suffering of the
people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of
gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an1.317">

##### 317 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans. What one person? Someone with right view,
whose perspective is undistorted. They draw many people away from false
teachings and establish them in the true teaching. This is one person
who arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for
the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an1.318">

##### 318 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very blameworthy as
wrong view. Wrong view is the most blameworthy thing of all."

</article>
<article id="an1.319">

##### 319 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single other person who acts for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans, as that futile man, the
bamboo-staffed ascetic. Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would
bring harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish, so too that
futile man, the bamboo-staffed ascetic, is a trap for humans, it seems
to me. He has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and
disaster of many beings."

</article>
<article id="an1.320">

##### 320 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a poorly explained
teaching and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who
practices accordingly all create much wickedness. Why is that? Because
the teaching is poorly explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.321">

##### 321 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a well explained teaching
and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much merit. Why is that? Because the teaching is
well explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.322">

##### 322 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training, the donor
should know moderation, not the recipient. Why is that? Because the
teaching is poorly explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.323">

##### 323 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training, the recipient
should know moderation, not the donor. Why is that? Because the teaching
is well explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.324">

##### 324 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training an energetic
person lives in suffering. Why is that? Because the teaching is poorly
explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.325">

##### 325 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training a lazy person
lives in suffering. Why is that? Because the teaching is well
explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.326">

##### 326 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training a lazy person
lives happily. Why is that? Because the teaching is poorly explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.327">

##### 327 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training an energetic
person lives happily. Why is that? Because the teaching is well
explained."

</article>
<article id="an1.328">

##### 328 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Just as, mendicants, even a tiny bit of fecal matter still stinks, so
too I don't approve of even a tiny bit of continued existence, not even
as long as a finger-snap."

</article>
<article id="an1.329">

##### 329--332 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Just as even a tiny bit of urine, or spit, or pus, or blood still
stinks, so too I don't approve of even a tiny bit of continued
existence, not even as long as a finger-snap."

</article>
:::

::: {#an1-ekadhamma.xhtml_an1.333-377 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.333--377]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chapter Four ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.333">

##### 333 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, while the hilly terrain,
inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are
many; so too the sentient beings born on land are few, while those born
in water are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.334">

##### 334 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings reborn as humans are few, while those not
reborn as humans are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.335">

##### 335 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings reborn in civilized countries are few,
while those reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, are
many.

</article>
<article id="an1.336">

##### 336 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who are wise, bright, clever, and able to
distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are few, while
the sentient beings who are witless, dull, stupid, and unable to
distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.337">

##### 337 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who have the noble eye of wisdom are few,
while those who are ignorant and confused are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.338">

##### 338 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who get to see a Realized One are few,
while those who don't get to see a Realized One are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.339">

##### 339 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who get to hear the teaching and training
proclaimed by a Realized One are few, while those sentient beings who
don't get to hear the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One
are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.340">

##### 340 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who remember the teachings they hear are
few, while those who don't remember the teachings are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.341">

##### 341 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who examine the meaning of the teachings
they have memorized are few, while those who don't examine the meaning
of the teachings are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.342">

##### 342 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who understand the meaning and the
teaching and practice accordingly are few, while those who understand
the meaning and the teaching but don't practice accordingly are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.343">

##### 343 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings inspired by inspiring places are few,
while those who are uninspired are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.344">

##### 344 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who, being inspired, strive effectively
are few, while those who, even though inspired, don't strive effectively
are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.345">

##### 345 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who, relying on letting go, gain
immersion, gain unification of mind are few, while those who don't gain
immersion, don't gain unification of mind relying on letting go are
many.

</article>
<article id="an1.346">

##### 346 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who get the best food and flavors are
few, while those who don't get the best food and flavors, but get by
with scraps in an alms bowl are many.

</article>
<article id="an1.347">

##### 347 {.sutta-title .subheading}

... so too the sentient beings who get the essence of the meaning, the
essence of the teaching, and the essence of freedom are few, while the
sentient beings who don't get the essence of the meaning, the essence of
the teaching, and the essence of freedom are many.

So you should train like this: 'We will get the essence of the meaning,
the essence of the teaching, the essence of freedom.' That's how you
should train."

</article>
<article id="an1.347-349">

##### 348--350 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, while the hilly terrain,
inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are
many; so too, those who die as humans and are reborn as humans are few,
while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.350-352">

##### 351--353 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.353-355">

##### 354--356 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.356-358">

##### 357--359 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.359-361">

##### 360--362 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.362-364">

##### 363--365 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.365-367">

##### 366--368 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.368-370">

##### 369--371 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.371-373">

##### 372--374 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
<article id="an1.374-377">

##### 375--377 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-pasadakaradhammavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Inspiring Qualities {#an1-pasadakaradhammavagga.xhtml_an1-pasadakaradhammavagga .section-title .heading}

<article class="range" id="an1.378-393">

#### [AN 1.378--393]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Inspiring Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pasādakaradhammavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

"Mendicants, this is definitely something worth having, that is, living
in the wilderness ...

eating only almsfood ...

wearing rag robes ...

having just three robes ...

teaching Dhamma ...

memorizing the monastic law ...

being very learned ...

being respected ...

being well-presented ...

having a following ...

having a large following ...

coming from a good family ...

being handsome ...

being a good speaker ...

having few wishes ...

having good health."

</article>

[]{#an1-aparaaccharasanghatavagga.xhtml}

## Another Chapter on a Finger-Snap {#an1-aparaaccharasanghatavagga.xhtml_an1-aparaaccharasanghatavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-aparaaccharasanghatavagga.xhtml_an1.394-574 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.394--574]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Another Chapter on a Finger-Snap ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparaaccharāsaṅghātavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.394">

##### 394 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the first absorption, even as long
as a finger-snap, they are called a mendicant who does not lack
absorption, who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to
advice, and who does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more
so those who make much of it!"

</article>
<article id="an1.395-401">

##### 395--401 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the second ... third ... or fourth
absorption ... or the heart's release by love ... or the heart's release
by compassion ... or the heart's release by rejoicing ... or the heart's
release by equanimity, even as long as a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.402-405">

##### 402--405 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body ... feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.406-409">

##### 406--409 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise, even for the time
of a finger-snap ... If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have
arisen are given up, even for the time of a finger-snap ... If they
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that skillful qualities that have not arisen do arise, even for the time
of a finger-snap ... If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.410-413">

##### 410--413 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort ... the basis of psychic
power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort
... the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and
active effort, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.414-418">

##### 414--418 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they develop the faculty of faith ... the faculty of energy ... the
faculty of mindfulness ... the faculty of immersion ... the faculty of
wisdom, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.419-423">

##### 419--423 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they develop the power of faith ... the power of energy ... the power
of mindfulness ... the power of immersion ... the power of wisdom, even
for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.424-430">

##### 424--430 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they develop the awakening factor of mindfulness ... the awakening
factor of investigation of principles ... the awakening factor of energy
... the awakening factor of rapture ... the awakening factor of
tranquility ... the awakening factor of immersion ... the awakening
factor of equanimity, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.431-438">

##### 431--438 {.sutta-title .subheading}

If they develop right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

</article>
<article id="an1.439-446">

##### 439--446 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly. Having mastered this, they are aware that: 'I know and
see.' ... Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Having mastered this, they are aware
that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they see
forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. Having mastered this,
they are aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form
internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly.
Having mastered this, they are aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not
perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. Having mastered this, they are
aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they
see forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow
appearance. Having mastered this, they are aware that: 'I know and see.'
... Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. Having mastered this, they are
aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they
see forms externally that are white, with white color and white
appearance. Having mastered this, they are aware that: 'I know and see.'
...

</article>
<article id="an1.447-454">

##### 447--454 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Having physical form, they see forms ... not perceiving form internally,
they see forms externally ... they're focused only on beauty ... going
totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space
... going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness ... going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they enter
and remain in the dimension of nothingness ... going totally beyond the
dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception ... going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and
remain in the cessation of perception and feeling ...

</article>
<article id="an1.455-464">

##### 455--464 {.sutta-title .subheading}

They develop the meditation on universal earth ... the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
the meditation on universal consciousness ...

</article>
<article id="an1.465-474">

##### 465--474 {.sutta-title .subheading}

They develop the perception of ugliness ... the perception of death ...
the perception of the repulsiveness of food ... the perception of
dissatisfaction with the whole world ... the perception of impermanence
... the perception of suffering in impermanence ... the perception of
not-self in suffering ... the perception of giving up ... the perception
of fading away ... the perception of cessation ...

</article>
<article id="an1.475-484">

##### 475--484 {.sutta-title .subheading}

They develop the perception of impermanence ... the perception of
not-self ... the perception of death ... the perception of the
repulsiveness of food ... the perception of dissatisfaction with the
whole world ... the perception of a skeleton ... the perception of the
worm-infested corpse ... the perception of the livid corpse ... the
perception of the split open corpse ... the perception of the bloated
corpse ...

</article>
<article id="an1.485-494">

##### 485--494 {.sutta-title .subheading}

They develop the recollection of the Buddha ... the recollection of the
teaching ... the recollection of the Saṅgha ... the recollection of
ethical conduct ... the recollection of generosity ... the recollection
of the deities ... mindfulness of breathing ... the recollection of
death ... mindfulness of the body ... the recollection of peace ...

</article>
<article id="an1.495-574">

##### 495--574 {.sutta-title .subheading}

They develop the faculty of faith together with the first absorption ...
the faculty of energy ... the faculty of mindfulness ... the faculty of
immersion ... the faculty of wisdom ... the power of faith ... the power
of energy ... the power of mindfulness ... the power of immersion ...
the power of wisdom together with the first absorption ...

Together with the second absorption ...

the third absorption ...

the fourth absorption ...

love ...

compassion ...

rejoicing ...

They develop the faculty of faith together with equanimity ... They
develop the faculty of energy ... the faculty of mindfulness ... the
faculty of immersion ... the faculty of wisdom ... the power of faith
... the power of energy ... the power of mindfulness ... the power of
immersion ... the power of wisdom.

That mendicant is called a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who
follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who does
not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make much
of it!"

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-kayagatasativagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Mindfulness of the Body {#an1-kayagatasativagga.xhtml_an1-kayagatasativagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-kayagatasativagga.xhtml_an1.575-615 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.575--615]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Mindfulness of the Body ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāyagatāsativagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.575">

##### 575 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, anyone who brings into their mind the great ocean includes
all of the streams that run into it. In the same way, anyone who has
developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes all of the
skillful qualities that play a part in realization."

</article>
<article id="an1.576-582">

##### 576--582 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to great
urgency ... great benefit ... great sanctuary from the yoke ...
mindfulness and awareness ... gaining knowledge and vision ... blissful
meditation in the present life ... the realization of the fruit of
knowledge and freedom. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one
thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to great urgency ... great
benefit ... great sanctuary from the yoke ... mindfulness and awareness
... gaining knowledge and vision ... a happy abiding in the present life
... the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom."

</article>
<article id="an1.583">

##### 583 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated the body and
mind become tranquil, thinking and considering settle down, and all of
the qualities that play a part in realization are fully developed. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, the body and mind become tranquil, thinking and considering
settle down, and all of the qualities that play a part in realization
are fully developed."

</article>
<article id="an1.584">

##### 584 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, unskillful
qualities do not arise, and, if they've already arisen, they are given
up. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is
developed and cultivated, unskillful qualities do not arise, and, if
they've already arisen, they are given up."

</article>
<article id="an1.585">

##### 585 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, skillful
qualities arise, and, once they've arisen, they increase and grow. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, skillful qualities arise, and, once they've arisen, they
increase and grow."

</article>
<article id="an1.586-590">

##### 586--590 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, ignorance is
given up ... knowledge arises ... the conceit 'I am' is given up ... the
underlying tendencies are uprooted ... the fetters are given up. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, ignorance is given up ... knowledge arises ... the conceit
'I am' is given up ... the underlying tendencies are uprooted ... the
fetters are given up."

</article>
<article id="an1.591-592">

##### 591--592 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to
demolition by wisdom ... to extinguishment by not grasping. What one
thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing, mendicants, when
developed and cultivated leads to demolition by wisdom ... to
extinguishment by not grasping."

</article>
<article id="an1.593-595">

##### 593--595 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When one thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of
many elements ... the penetration of diverse elements ... the analysis
of many elements. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one
thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of many
elements ... the penetration of diverse elements ... the analysis of
many elements."

</article>
<article id="an1.596-599">

##### 596--599 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to the
realization of the fruit of stream-entry ... once-return ... non-return
... perfection. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing,
when developed and cultivated, leads to the realization of the fruit of
stream-entry ... once-return ... non-return ... perfection."

</article>
<article id="an1.600-615">

##### 600--615 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads to the
getting of wisdom ... the growth of wisdom ... the increase of wisdom
... to great wisdom ... to widespread wisdom ... to abundant wisdom ...
to deep wisdom ... to extraordinary wisdom ... to vast wisdom ... to
much wisdom ... to fast wisdom ... to light wisdom ... to laughing
wisdom ... to swift wisdom ... to sharp wisdom ... to penetrating
wisdom. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing, when
developed and cultivated, leads to the getting of wisdom ... the growth
of wisdom ... the increase of wisdom ... to great wisdom ... to
widespread wisdom ... to abundant wisdom ... to deep wisdom ... to
extraordinary wisdom ... to vast wisdom ... to much wisdom ... to fast
wisdom ... to light wisdom ... to laughing wisdom ... to swift wisdom
... to sharp wisdom ... to penetrating wisdom."

</article>
:::

[]{#an1-amatavagga.xhtml}

## The Chapter on Freedom From Death {#an1-amatavagga.xhtml_an1-amatavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an1-amatavagga.xhtml_an1.616-627 .section .range}
#### [AN 1.616--627]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Freedom From Death ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Amatavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an1.616">

##### 616 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who don't enjoy mindfulness of the body don't enjoy
freedom from death. Those who enjoy mindfulness of the body enjoy
freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.617">

##### 617 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't enjoyed mindfulness of the body haven't
enjoyed freedom from death. Those who have enjoyed mindfulness of the
body have enjoyed freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.618">

##### 618 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who have lost mindfulness of the body have lost
freedom from death. Those who haven't lost mindfulness of the body
haven't lost freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.619">

##### 619 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who have missed out on mindfulness of the body have
missed out on freedom from death. Those who have undertaken mindfulness
of the body have not missed out on freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.620">

##### 620 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who have neglected mindfulness of the body have
neglected freedom from death. Those who have not neglected mindfulness
of the body have not neglected freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.621">

##### 621 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who have forgotten mindfulness of the body have
forgotten freedom from death. Those who haven't forgotten mindfulness of
the body haven't forgotten freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.622">

##### 622 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't cultivated mindfulness of the body
haven't cultivated freedom from death. Those who have cultivated
mindfulness of the body have cultivated freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.623">

##### 623 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't developed mindfulness of the body haven't
developed freedom from death. Those who have developed mindfulness of
the body have developed freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.624">

##### 624 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't made much of mindfulness of the body
haven't made much of the deathless. Those who have made much of
mindfulness of the body have made much of the deathless."

</article>
<article id="an1.625">

##### 625 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't had insight into mindfulness of the body
haven't had insight into freedom from death. Those who have had insight
into mindfulness of the body have had insight into freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.626">

##### 626 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't completely understood mindfulness of the
body haven't completely understood freedom from death. Those who have
completely understood mindfulness of the body have completely understood
freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an1.627">

##### 627 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, those who haven't realized mindfulness of the body haven't
realized freedom from death. Those who have realized mindfulness of the
body have realized freedom from death."

The thousand discourses of the Ones are completed.

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Ones is finished.

</article>
:::

[]{#an2.xhtml}

# The Book of the Twos {#an2.xhtml_an2 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an2-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an2-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an2-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Punishments {#an2-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an2-kammakaranavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an2.1-10 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.1--10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Punishments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kammakaraṇavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.1">

##### 1. Faults {.sutta-title .subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"There are, mendicants, these two faults. What two? The fault apparent
in the present life, and the fault to do with lives to come.

What is the fault apparent in the present life? It's when someone sees
that kings have arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to
various punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands
or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot',
the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the
'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope',
the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar',
the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs,
being impaled alive, and being beheaded.

It occurs to them: 'If I were to commit the kinds of bad deeds for which
the kings arrested that bandit, that criminal, the rulers would arrest
me and subject me to the same punishments. Afraid of the fault apparent
in the present life, they do not steal the belongings of others. This is
called the fault apparent in the present life.

What is the fault to do with lives to come? It's when someone reflects:
'Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in the
next life. If I conduct myself badly, then, when my body breaks up,
after death, won't I be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell?' Afraid of the fault to do with lives to come, they
give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This
is called the fault to do with lives to come.

These are the two faults.

So you should train like this: 'We will fear the fault apparent in the
present life, and we will fear the fault to do with lives to come. We
will fear faults, seeing the danger in faults.' That's how you should
train. If you fear faults, seeing the danger in faults, you can expect
to be freed from all faults."

</article>
<article id="an2.2">

##### 2. Endeavor {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two endeavors are challenging in the world. What two? The
endeavor of laypeople staying in a home to provide robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And the endeavor of
those gone forth from the lay life to homelessness to let go of all
attachments. These are the two endeavors that are challenging in the
world.

The better of these two endeavors is the effort to let go of all
attachments.

So you should train like this: 'We shall endeavor to let go of all
attachments.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an2.3">

##### 3. Mortifying {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things, mendicants, are mortifying. What two? It's when
someone has done bad things and not done good things, by way of body,
speech, and mind. Thinking, 'I've done bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind', they're mortified. Thinking, 'I haven't done good
things by way of body, speech, and mind', they're mortified. These are
the two things that are mortifying."

</article>
<article id="an2.4">

##### 4. Not Mortifying {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things, mendicants, are not mortifying. What two? It's when
someone has done good things and not done bad things, by way of body,
speech, and mind. Thinking, 'I've done good things by way of body,
speech, and mind', they're not mortified. Thinking, 'I haven't done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind', they're not mortified. These
are the two things that are not mortifying."

</article>
<article id="an2.5">

##### 5. Learned for Myself {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I have learned these two things for myself---to never be
content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying.

I never stopped trying, thinking: 'Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and
bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not
stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength,
energy, and vigor.'

It was by diligence that I achieved awakening, and by diligence that I
achieved the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

If you too never stop trying, thinking: 'Gladly, let only skin, sinews,
and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will
not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human
strength, energy, and vigor.' You will soon realize the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live
having achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

So you should train like this: 'We will never stop trying, thinking:
"Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and
blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have
achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor."' That's
how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an2.6">

##### 6. Fetters {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Seeing things that
are prone to being fettered as gratifying, and seeing things that are
prone to being fettered as boring. When you keep seeing things that are
prone to being fettered as gratifying, you don't give up greed, hate,
and delusion. When these are not given up, you're not freed from
rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. You're not freed from suffering, I say.

When you keep seeing things that are prone to being fettered as boring,
you give up greed, hate, and delusion. When these are given up, you're
freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress. You're freed from suffering, I say. These are the
two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.7">

##### 7. Dark {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things, mendicants, are dark. What two? Lack of conscience
and prudence. These are the two things that are dark."

</article>
<article id="an2.8">

##### 8. Bright {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things, mendicants, are bright. What two? Conscience and
prudence. These are the two things that are bright."

</article>
<article id="an2.9">

##### 9. Conduct {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two bright things, mendicants, protect the world. What two?
Conscience and prudence. If these two bright things did not protect the
world, there would be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or
wives and partners of tutors and respected people. The world would
become dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals. But because the two bright things protect the world, there is
recognition of the status of mother, aunts, and wives and partners of
tutors and respected people."

</article>
<article id="an2.10">

##### 10. Entering the Rainy Season {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two entries to the rainy season. What two?
Earlier and later. These are the two entries to the rainy season."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-adhikaranavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Disciplinary Issues {#an2-adhikaranavagga.xhtml_an2-adhikaranavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-adhikaranavagga.xhtml_an2.11-20 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.11--20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Disciplinary Issues ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhikaraṇavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.11">

##### 11 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? In this context, the
power of development is the power of the trainees. For when you rely on
the power of a trainee, you give up greed, hate, and delusion. Then you
don't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad. This is called
the power of development. These are the two powers."

</article>
<article id="an2.12">

##### 12 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a mendicant
develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity,
which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as
letting go. This is called the power of development. These are the two
powers."

</article>
<article id="an2.13">

##### 13 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. This is called the power of development. These are the
two powers."

</article>
<article id="an2.14">

##### 14 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, the Realized One has two ways of teaching the Dhamma. What
two? In brief and in detail. These are the Realized One's two ways of
teaching the Dhamma."

</article>
<article id="an2.15">

##### 15 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, in a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant
nor the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect
that issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants
won't live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the
offending mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves, you can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and
enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably.

And how, mendicants, does an offending mendicant carefully check
themselves? An offending mendicant reflects: 'I have committed a certain
unskillful offense with the body. That mendicant saw me do this. If I
hadn't committed that offense, they wouldn't have seen me. But since I
did commit that offense, they did see me. When they saw me, they were
upset, and they voiced their unhappiness to me. Then I also got upset,
so I told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone who owes
customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an offending
mendicant carefully checks themselves.

And how, mendicants, does an accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves? An accusing mendicant reflects: 'This mendicant has
committed a certain unskillful offense with the body. I saw them do
that. If they hadn't committed that offense, I wouldn't have seen them.
But since they did commit that offense, I did see them. When I saw them,
I was upset, and I voiced my unhappiness to them. Then they also got
upset, so they told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone
who owes customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves.

In a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant nor the
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that
issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants won't
live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the offending
mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you
can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the
mendicants will live comfortably."

</article>
<article id="an2.16">

##### 16 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm?"

"Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he was righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an2.17">

##### 17 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"But what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm."

"I don't understand the meaning of what Mister Gotama has said in brief,
without explaining the details. Mister Gotama, please teach me this
matter in detail so I can understand the meaning."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, brahmin, someone has done bad things and not done good things
by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what they've
not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Furthermore, brahmin, someone has done good things and not done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what
they've not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an2.18">

##### 18 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should
not do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should not be done, what
drawbacks should they expect?"

"They should expect these drawbacks. They blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people criticize them. They get a bad reputation.
They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These are the drawbacks they should expect."

"Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should be done, what
benefits should they expect?"

"They should expect these benefits. They don't blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people praise them. They get a good reputation.
They don't feel lost when they die. And when the body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the
benefits they should expect."

</article>
<article id="an2.19">

##### 19 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, give up the unskillful. It is possible to give up the
unskillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Give up the
unskillful.' But it is possible, and so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'
And if giving up the unskillful led to harm and suffering, I would not
say: 'Give up the unskillful.' But giving up the unskillful leads to
welfare and happiness, so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'

Mendicants, develop the skillful. It is possible to develop the
skillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Develop the skillful.'
But it is possible, and so I say: 'Develop the skillful.' If developing
the skillful led to harm and suffering I wouldn't say: 'Develop the
skillful.' But developing the skillful leads to welfare and happiness,
so I say: 'Develop the skillful.'"

</article>
<article id="an2.20">

##### 20 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things, mendicants, lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are misplaced, and
the meaning is misinterpreted. When the words and phrases are misplaced,
the meaning is misinterpreted. These two things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are well organized,
and the meaning is correctly interpreted. When the words and phrases are
well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. These two things
lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-balavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Fools {#an2-balavagga.xhtml_an2-balavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-balavagga.xhtml_an2.21-31 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.21--31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Fools ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.21">

##### 21 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who doesn't recognize
when they've made a mistake. And one who doesn't properly accept the
confession of someone who's made a mistake. These are the two fools.

There are two who are astute. What two? One who recognizes when they've
made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone
who's made a mistake. These are the two who are astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.22">

##### 22 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
is hateful and hides it, and one whose faith is mistaken. These two
misrepresent the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an2.23">

##### 23 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. And
one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by
him. These two misrepresent the Realized One.

These two don't misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him.
And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as spoken by
him. These two don't misrepresent the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an2.24">

##### 24 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse whose
meaning is explicit. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is
explicit as a discourse in need of interpretation. These two
misrepresent the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an2.25">

##### 25 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two don't misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse in need of
interpretation. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is
explicit as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. These two don't
misrepresent the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an2.26">

##### 26 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when you hide your misdeeds, you can expect one of two
destinies: hell or the animal realm.

When you don't hide your misdeeds, you can expect one of two destinies:
as a god or a human."

</article>
<article id="an2.27">

##### 27 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when you have wrong view, you can expect one of two
destinies: hell or the animal realm."

</article>
<article id="an2.28">

##### 28 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, when you have right view, you can expect one of two
destinies: as a god or a human."

</article>
<article id="an2.29">

##### 29 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two places waiting to receive an unethical person: hell and
the animal realm.

There are two places waiting to receive an ethical person: the realms of
gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an2.30">

##### 30 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest. What two? Seeing a happy life for oneself in
the present, and having sympathy for future generations. I see two
reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

</article>
<article id="an2.31">

##### 31 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things play a part in realization. What two? Serenity and
discernment.

What is the benefit of developing serenity? The mind is developed. What
is the benefit of developing the mind? Greed is given up.

What is the benefit of developing discernment? Wisdom is developed. What
is the benefit of developing wisdom? Ignorance is given up.

The mind contaminated by greed is not free; and wisdom contaminated by
ignorance does not grow. In this way, freedom of heart comes from the
fading away of greed, while freedom by wisdom comes from the fading away
of ignorance."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-samacittavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Peaceful Mind {#an2-samacittavagga.xhtml_an2-samacittavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-samacittavagga.xhtml_an2.32-41 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.32--41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on the Peaceful Mind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samacittavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.32">

##### 32 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the level of the untrue person and the
level of the true person. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is the level of the untrue person? The untrue person is ungrateful
and thankless, for the wicked only know how to be ungrateful and
thankless. It is totally the level of an untrue person to be ungrateful
and thankless. The true person is grateful and thankful, for the
virtuous only know how to be grateful and thankful. It is totally the
level of a true person to be grateful and thankful."

</article>
<article id="an2.33">

##### 33 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I say that these two people cannot easily be repaid. What
two? Mother and father.

You would not have done enough to repay your mother and father even if
you were to carry your mother around on one shoulder and your father on
the other, and if you lived like this for a hundred years, and if you
were to anoint, massage, bathe, and rub them; and even if they were to
defecate and urinate right there.

Even if you were to establish your mother and father as supreme monarchs
of this great earth, abounding in the seven treasures, you would still
not have done enough to repay them. Why is that? Parents are very
helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them
the world.

But you have done enough, more than enough, to repay them if you
encourage, settle, and ground unfaithful parents in faith, unethical
parents in ethical conduct, stingy parents in generosity, or ignorant
parents in wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an2.34">

##### 34 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha, "What does Mister Gotama teach?
What does he explain?"

"Brahmin, I teach action and inaction."

"But in what way does Mister Gotama teach action and inaction?"

"I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and
the many kinds of unskillful things. I teach action regarding good
bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of skillful
things. This is the kind of action and inaction that I teach."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an2.35">

##### 35 {.sutta-title .subheading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to the Buddha, "How many in the world are
worthy of a religious donation? And where should a gift be given?"

"Householder, there are two in the world who are worthy of a religious
donation: the trainee and the adept. These two in the world are worthy
of a religious donation, and that's where you should give a gift."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "In this world, the trainee and the adept,\
> are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.\
> They are upright in body,\
> speech, and mind.\
> This is the field for sponsors of sacrifice---\
> what's given here is very fruitful."

</article>
<article id="an2.36">

##### 36 {.sutta-title .subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in the
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery. There
Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"I will teach you about a person fettered internally and one fettered
externally. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Who is a person fettered internally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they pass away from
there, they're a returner, who comes back to this place. This is called
a person who is fettered internally, a returner, who comes back to this
place.

Who is a person fettered externally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. They enter and remain in a certain
peaceful state of freed mind. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they pass away from
there, they're a non-returner, not coming back to this place. This is
called a person who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not
come back to this place.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical ... they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding sensual pleasures. They simply practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. They
practice for the ending of craving. They practice for the ending of
greed. When their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in one of
the orders of gods. When they pass away from there, they are
non-returners, not coming back to this place. This is called a person
who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not come back to
this place."

Then several peaceful-minded deities went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood
to one side, and said to the Buddha, "Sir, Venerable Sāriputta is in the
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is
teaching the mendicants about a person with internal fetters and one
with external fetters. The assembly is overjoyed! Sir, please go to
Venerable Sāriputta out of sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then the Buddha, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared in the stilt
longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery, in front of
Sāriputta. He sat on the seat spread out. Sāriputta bowed to the Buddha
and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Just now, Sāriputta, several peaceful-minded deities came up to me,
bowed, and stood to one side. Those deities said to me: 'Sir, Venerable
Sāriputta is in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery, where he is teaching the mendicants about a person with
internal fetters and one with external fetters. The assembly is
overjoyed! Sir, please go to Venerable Sāriputta out of sympathy.'

Those deities, though they number ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or
sixty, can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against
each other.

Sāriputta, you might think: 'Surely those deities, since so many of them
can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against each
other, must have developed their minds in that place.' But you should
not see it like this. It was right here that those deities developed
their minds.

So you should train like this: 'We shall have peaceful faculties and
peaceful minds.' That's how you should train. When your faculties and
mind are peaceful, your acts of body, speech, and mind will be peaceful,
thinking: 'We shall present the gift of peace to our spiritual
companions.' That's how you should train.

Those wanderers of other religions, Sāriputta, who have not heard this
exposition of the teaching are lost."

</article>
<article id="an2.37">

##### 37 {.sutta-title .subheading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying
at Varaṇā, on the bank of the Kaddama Lake.

Then the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa went up to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to Mahākaccāna:

"What is the cause, Mister Kaccāna, what is the reason why aristocrats
fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders
fight with householders?"

"It is because of their insistence on sensual desire, their shackles,
avarice, and attachment, that aristocrats fight with aristocrats,
brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders."

"What is the cause, Mister Kaccāna, what is the reason why ascetics
fight with ascetics?"

"It is because of their insistence on views, their shackles, avarice,
and attachment, that ascetics fight with ascetics."

"Mister Kaccāna, is there anyone in the world who has gone beyond the
insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views?"

"There is, brahmin."

"Who in the world has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and
the insistence on views?"

"In the eastern lands there is a city called Sāvatthī. There the Blessed
One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. He,
brahmin, has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the
insistence on views."

When this was said, the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa got up from his seat,
arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his
joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment
three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

He who has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the
insistence on views.

Excellent, Mister Kaccāna! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Kaccāna has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Kaccāna remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an2.38">

##### 38 {.sutta-title .subheading}

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying near Madhurā, in Gunda's
Grove.

Then the brahmin Kandarāyana went up to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged
greetings with him ... He sat down to one side and said to Mahākaccāna:

"I have heard, Mister Kaccāna, that the ascetic Kaccāna doesn't bow to
old brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. And this is indeed the case, for the ascetic Kaccāna
does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in
years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in
their presence or offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister
Kaccāna."

"There is the stage of an elder and the stage of youth as explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. If an elder, though eighty, ninety, or a hundred years
old, still dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as a child, not a senior. If a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life, does not dwell in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as astute, a senior."

When this was said, the brahmin Kandarāyana got up from his seat, placed
his robe over one shoulder, and bowed with his head at the feet of the
young mendicants, saying, "The good sirs are elders, at the stage of the
elder; we are youths, at the stage of youth.

Excellent, Mister Kaccāna! ... From this day forth, may Mister Kaccāna
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an2.39">

##### 39 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"At a time when bandits are strong, kings are weak. Then the king is not
at ease when going out or coming back or when touring the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are not at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when bad mendicants are strong, good-hearted mendicants
are weak. Then the good-hearted mendicants continually adhere to silence
in the midst of the Saṅgha, or they stay in the borderlands. This is for
the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the
harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

At a time when kings are strong, bandits are weak. Then the king is at
ease when going out or coming back or when inspecting the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when good-hearted mendicants are strong, bad mendicants
are weak. Then the bad mendicants continually adhere to silence in the
midst of the Saṅgha, or they leave for some place or other. This is for
the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an2.40">

##### 40 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I don't praise wrong practice for these two, for laypeople
and renunciates. Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor
renunciates succeed in completing the system of the skillful teaching.

I praise right practice for these two, for laypeople and renunciates.
Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in
completing the system of the skillful teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.41">

##### 41 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, by memorizing the discourses incorrectly, taking only a
semblance of the phrasing, some mendicants shut out the meaning and the
teaching. They act for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear.

But by memorizing the discourses well, not taking only a semblance of
the phrasing, some mendicants reinforce the meaning and the teaching.
They act for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people,
for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create
much merit and make the true teaching continue."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-parisavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Assemblies {#an2-parisavagga.xhtml_an2-parisavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-parisavagga.xhtml_an2.42-51 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.42--51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Assemblies ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parisavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.42">

##### 42 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A shallow
assembly and a deep assembly. And what is a shallow assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants are restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and
immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. This is
called a shallow assembly.

And what is a deep assembly? An assembly where the mendicants are not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but have
established mindfulness, situational awareness, immersion, unified
minds, and restrained faculties. This is called a deep assembly. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the deep
assembly."

</article>
<article id="an2.43">

##### 43 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A divided
assembly and a harmonious assembly. And what is a divided assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants argue, quarrel, and dispute, continually
wounding each other with barbed words. This is called a divided
assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly. These are the two assemblies. The better
of these two assemblies is the harmonious assembly."

</article>
<article id="an2.44">

##### 44 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the worst and an assembly of the best. And what is an assembly of the
worst? An assembly where the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack,
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. Those who come after follow their example. They too become
indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not
rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of the worst.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders;
instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after follow their example. They too are not indulgent or
slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in
seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of
the best. These are the two assemblies. The better of these two
assemblies is the assembly of the best."

</article>
<article id="an2.45">

##### 45 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An ignoble
assembly and a noble assembly. And what is an ignoble assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants don't truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called an ignoble assembly.

And what is a noble assembly? An assembly where the mendicants truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called a noble assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
noble assembly."

</article>
<article id="an2.46">

##### 46 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the dregs and an assembly of the cream. And what is an assembly of the
dregs? An assembly where the mendicants make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. This is called an
assembly of the dregs.

And what is an assembly of the cream? An assembly where the mendicants
make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and
cowardice. This is called an assembly of the cream. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the
cream."

</article>
<article id="an2.47">

##### 47 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning, and an assembly educated in
questioning, not in fancy talk. And what is an assembly educated in
fancy talk, not in questioning? It is an assembly where, when discourses
spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited the mendicants do
want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand, and they
think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when
they've memorized those teachings they don't question or examine each
other, saying: 'Why does it say this? What does that mean?' So they
don't clarify what is unclear, or reveal what is obscure, or dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is called an assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning.

And what is an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk? It
is an assembly where, when discourses composed by poets---poetry, with
fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by
disciples---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses spoken
by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They
actively listen and try to understand, and they think those teachings
are worth learning and memorizing. And when they've memorized those
teachings they question and examine each other, saying: 'Why does it say
this? What does that mean?' So they clarify what is unclear, reveal what
is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This
is called an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk."

</article>
<article id="an2.48">

##### 48 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly that
values things of the flesh, not the true teaching, and an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. And what is an
assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching? It is
an assembly where the mendicants praise each other in front of the
white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so is freed both
ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct witness;
so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is
a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is
ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.'
They thereby acquire material things. And when they get these things,
they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and
not understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that values
things of the flesh, not the true teaching.

And what is an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the
flesh? It is an assembly where the mendicants don't praise each other in
front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so
is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct
witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith;
so-and-so is a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith;
so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad
character.' They thereby acquire material things. And when they get
these things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh."

</article>
<article id="an2.49">

##### 49 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unjust
assembly and a just assembly. And what is an unjust assembly? An
assembly where legal acts against the teaching proceed, while legal acts
in line with the teaching don't proceed. Legal acts against the training
proceed, while legal acts in line with the training don't proceed. Legal
acts against the teaching are explained, while legal acts in line with
the teaching aren't explained. Legal acts against the training are
explained, while legal acts in line with the training aren't explained.
This is called an unjust assembly.

And what is a just assembly? An assembly where legal acts in line with
the teaching proceed, while legal acts against the teaching don't
proceed. Legal acts in line with the training proceed, while legal acts
against the training don't proceed. Legal acts in line with the teaching
are explained, while legal acts against the teaching aren't explained.
Legal acts in line with the training are explained, while legal acts
against the training aren't explained. This is called a just assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
just assembly."

</article>
<article id="an2.50">

##### 50 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unprincipled
assembly and a principled assembly ... The better of these two
assemblies is the principled assembly."

</article>
<article id="an2.51">

##### 51 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly with
unprincipled speech, and an assembly with principled speech. And what is
an assembly with unprincipled speech? It is an assembly where the
mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. But
they don't persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, nor
do they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Unable
to persuade or convince each other, they can't let go of their opinions.
They obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue, insisting that: 'This
is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is called an assembly
with unprincipled speech.

And what is an assembly with principled speech? It is an assembly where
the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not.
Then they persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, and
they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Since they
are able to persuade and convince each other, they let go of their
opinions. They don't obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue or
insist that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is
called an assembly with principled speech. These are the two assemblies.
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly with principled
speech."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an2-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Persons {#an2-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2-puggalavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2.52-63 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.52--63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puggalavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.52">

##### 52 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people, mendicants, arise in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans. What two? The Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These two
people arise in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people,
for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

</article>
<article id="an2.53">

##### 53 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people, mendicants, arise in the world who are incredible
human beings. What two? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These are the two people
who arise in the world who are incredible human beings."

</article>
<article id="an2.54">

##### 54 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two people, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many
people. What two? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These are the two
people, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many people."

</article>
<article id="an2.55">

##### 55 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, these two are worthy of a monument. What two? The Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning
monarch. These are the two who are worthy of a monument."

</article>
<article id="an2.56">

##### 56 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two kinds of Buddhas. What two? The Realized One,
the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and an Independent Buddha.
These are the two kinds of Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an2.57">

##### 57 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred elephant.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

</article>
<article id="an2.58">

##### 58 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred horse.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

</article>
<article id="an2.59">

##### 59 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a lion, king of beasts.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

</article>
<article id="an2.60">

##### 60 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Aborigines see two reasons not to use regular speech. What two?
Thinking: 'May we not lie, and may we not misrepresent others with
falsehoods.' Aborigines see these two reasons not to use regular
speech."

</article>
<article id="an2.61">

##### 61 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, females die without getting enough of two things. What two?
Sexual intercourse and giving birth. Females die without getting enough
of these two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.62">

##### 62 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about living with bad people and living
with good people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is it like living with bad people? How do bad people live
together?

It's when a senior mendicant thinks: 'No mendicant, whether senior,
middle, or junior, should admonish me; and I shouldn't admonish any
mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a mendicant---whether
senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me, they wouldn't be
sympathetic, and I'd bother them by saying "No!" And anyway I wouldn't
deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.'

And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 'No mendicant, whether
senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me; and I shouldn't admonish
any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a
mendicant---whether senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me,
they wouldn't be sympathetic, and I'd bother them by saying "No!" And
anyway I wouldn't deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.'

That's what it's like living with bad people; that's how bad people live
together.

What is it like living with good people? How do good people live
together? It's when a senior mendicant thinks:

'Any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me;
and I should admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior.
If a mendicant---whether senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish
me, they'd be sympathetic, so I wouldn't bother them, but say "Thank
you!" And I'd deal with it when I saw what I did wrong.'

And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 'Any mendicant, whether
senior, middle, or junior, may admonish me; and I'll admonish any
mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a mendicant---whether
senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me, they'd be sympathetic,
so I wouldn't bother them, but say "Thank you!" And I'd deal with it
when I saw what I did wrong.'

That's what it's like living with good people; that's how good people
live together."

</article>
<article id="an2.63">

##### 63 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk,
contempt for each other's views, resentment, bitterness, and
exasperation is not settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue
will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will not
live comfortably.

In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk, contempt
for each other's views, resentment, bitterness, and exasperation is well
settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue won't lead to
lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-sukhavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Happiness {#an2-sukhavagga.xhtml_an2-sukhavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-sukhavagga.xhtml_an2.64-76 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.64--76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukhavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.64">

##### 64 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of laypeople, and the happiness of renunciates. These are the
two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
the happiness of renunciates."

</article>
<article id="an2.65">

##### 65 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Sensual
happiness and the happiness of renunciation. These are the two kinds of
happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness
of renunciation."

</article>
<article id="an2.66">

##### 66 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of attachments, and the happiness of no attachments. These are
the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness
is the happiness of no attachments."

</article>
<article id="an2.67">

##### 67 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Defiled
happiness and undefiled happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of no
defilements."

</article>
<article id="an2.68">

##### 68 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness of the flesh and happiness not of the flesh. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness not of the flesh."

</article>
<article id="an2.69">

##### 69 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Noble
happiness and ignoble happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is noble happiness."

</article>
<article id="an2.70">

##### 70 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Physical
happiness and mental happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is mental happiness."

</article>
<article id="an2.71">

##### 71 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness with rapture and happiness free of rapture. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness free of rapture."

</article>
<article id="an2.72">

##### 72 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness with pleasure and happiness with equanimity. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness with equanimity."

</article>
<article id="an2.73">

##### 73 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of immersion and the happiness without immersion. These are
the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness
is the happiness of immersion."

</article>
<article id="an2.74">

##### 74 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on rapture and happiness that relies on freedom
from rapture. These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these
two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on freedom from
rapture."

</article>
<article id="an2.75">

##### 75 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on pleasure and happiness that relies on
equanimity. These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these
two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on equanimity."

</article>
<article id="an2.76">

##### 76 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on form and happiness that relies on the formless.
These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of
happiness is happiness that relies on the formless."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-sanimittavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with a Foundation {#an2-sanimittavagga.xhtml_an2-sanimittavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-sanimittavagga.xhtml_an2.77-86 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.77--86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter with a Basis ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sanimittavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.77">

##### 77 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a basis, not without
a basis. By giving up that basis, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.78">

##### 78 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a source, not without
a source. By giving up that source, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.79">

##### 79 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a cause, not without
a cause. By giving up that cause, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.80">

##### 80 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with conditions, not
without conditions. By giving up those conditions, those bad, unskillful
qualities do not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.81">

##### 81 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a reason, not without
a reason. By giving up that reason, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.82">

##### 82 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with form, not without
form. By giving up that form, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.83">

##### 83 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with feeling, not without
feeling. By giving up that feeling, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.84">

##### 84 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with perception, not
without perception. By giving up that perception, those bad, unskillful
qualities do not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.85">

##### 85 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with consciousness, not
without consciousness. By giving up that consciousness, those bad,
unskillful qualities do not occur."

</article>
<article id="an2.86">

##### 86 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a conditioned basis,
not without a conditioned basis. By giving up that conditioned basis,
those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-dhammavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Two Things {#an2-dhammavagga.xhtml_an2-dhammavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-dhammavagga.xhtml_an2.87-97 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.87--97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Two Things ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.87">

##### 87 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.88">

##### 88 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Exertion, and not
being scattered. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.89">

##### 89 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Name and form. These
are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.90">

##### 90 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Knowledge and
freedom. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.91">

##### 91 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Views favoring
continued existence and views favoring ending existence. These are the
two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.92">

##### 92 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Lack of conscience
and prudence. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.93">

##### 93 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Conscience and
prudence. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.94">

##### 94 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Being hard to
admonish and having bad friends. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.95">

##### 95 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Being easy to
admonish and having good friends. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.96">

##### 96 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Skill in the
elements and skill in application of mind. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.97">

##### 97 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Skill in offenses
and skill in resolving offenses. These are the two things."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-balavagga2.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Fools {#an2-balavagga2.xhtml_an2-balavagga2 .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-balavagga2.xhtml_an2.98-117 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.98--117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Fools ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.98">

##### 98 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who takes responsibility
for what has not come to pass, and one who doesn't take responsibility
for what has come to pass. These are the two fools."

</article>
<article id="an2.99">

##### 99 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who doesn't take
responsibility for what has not come to pass, and one who does take
responsibility for what has come to pass. These are the two who are
astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.100">

##### 100 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
unallowable. These are the two fools."

</article>
<article id="an2.101">

##### 101 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
allowable. These are the two who are astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.102">

##### 102 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives a
non-offense as an offense, and one who perceives an offense as a
non-offense. These are the two fools."

</article>
<article id="an2.103">

##### 103 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives a non-offense
as a non-offense, and one who perceives an offense as an offense. These
are the two who are astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.104">

##### 104 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as
not the teaching. These are the two fools."

</article>
<article id="an2.105">

##### 105 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives the teaching
as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching as not
the teaching. These are the two who are astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.106">

##### 106 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as not the training. These are the two fools."

</article>
<article id="an2.107">

##### 107 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives what is not
the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as the training. These are the two who are astute."

</article>
<article id="an2.108">

##### 108 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who is remorseful over
something they shouldn't be, and one who isn't remorseful over something
they should be. These are the two whose defilements grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.109">

##### 109 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who isn't
remorseful over something they shouldn't be, and one who is remorseful
over something they should be. These are the two whose defilements don't
grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.110">

##### 110 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
unallowable. These are the two whose defilements grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.111">

##### 111 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives what
is unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable
as allowable. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.112">

##### 112 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives an offense
as a non-offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as an offense.
These are the two whose defilements grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.113">

##### 113 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives an
offense as an offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as a
non-offense. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.114">

##### 114 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as
not the teaching. These are the two whose defilements grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.115">

##### 115 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives the
teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching
as not the teaching. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.116">

##### 116 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as not the training. These are the two whose defilements grow."

</article>
<article id="an2.117">

##### 117 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives what
is not the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is
the training as the training. These are the two whose defilements don't
grow."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Third Fifty {#an2-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2-tatiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Hopes That Are Hard to Give Up {#an2-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2-asaduppajahavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an2.118-129 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.118--129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Hopes That Are Hard to Give Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsāduppajahavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.118">

##### 118 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two hopes are hard to give up. What two? The hope for wealth and
the hope for long life. These are two hopes that are hard to give up."

</article>
<article id="an2.119">

##### 119 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people are rare in the world. What two? One who takes the
initiative, and one who is grateful and thankful. These are the two
people who are rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an2.120">

##### 120 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people are rare in the world. What two? One who is satisfied,
and one who satisfies others. These are the two people who are rare in
the world."

</article>
<article id="an2.121">

##### 121 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people are hard to satisfy in the world. What two? One who
continually hoards wealth, and one who continually wastes wealth. These
are the two people who are hard to satisfy in the world."

</article>
<article id="an2.122">

##### 122 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two people are easy to satisfy in the world. What two? One who
does not continually hoard wealth, and one who does not continually
waste wealth. These are the two people who are easy to satisfy in the
world."

</article>
<article id="an2.123">

##### 123 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two conditions for the arising of greed. What two? The
feature of beauty and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of greed."

</article>
<article id="an2.124">

##### 124 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two conditions for the arising of hate. What two? The feature
of harshness and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of hate."

</article>
<article id="an2.125">

##### 125 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two conditions for the arising of wrong view. What two? The
voice of another and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of wrong view."

</article>
<article id="an2.126">

##### 126 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are two conditions for the arising of right view. What two? The
voice of another and rational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of right view."

</article>
<article id="an2.127">

##### 127 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two offenses. What two? A light offense and a serious
offense. These are the two offenses."

</article>
<article id="an2.128">

##### 128 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two offenses. What two? An offense with corrupt
intention and an offense without corrupt intention. These are the two
offenses."

</article>
<article id="an2.129">

##### 129 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two offenses. What two? An offense requiring
rehabilitation and an offense not requiring rehabilitation. These are
the two offenses."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-ayacanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Aspiration {#an2-ayacanavagga.xhtml_an2-ayacanavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-ayacanavagga.xhtml_an2.130-140 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.130--140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Aspiration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āyācanavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.130">

##### 130 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"A faithful monk would rightly aspire: 'May I be like Sāriputta and
Moggallāna!' These are a standard and a measure for my monk disciples,
that is, Sāriputta and Moggallāna."

</article>
<article id="an2.131">

##### 131 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"A faithful nun would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the nuns Khemā and
Uppalavaṇṇā!' These are a standard and a measure for my nun disciples,
that is, the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā."

</article>
<article id="an2.132">

##### 132 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"A faithful layman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the householder
Citta and Hatthaka of Ãḷavī!' These are a standard and a measure for my
male lay followers, that is, the householder Citta and Hatthaka of
Ãḷavī."

</article>
<article id="an2.133">

##### 133 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"A faithful laywoman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the laywomen
Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother!' These are a standard and a
measure for my female lay disciples, that is, the laywomen Khujjuttarā
and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother."

</article>
<article id="an2.134">

##### 134 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What two? Without
examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism and
they criticize those deserving of praise. When a foolish, incompetent
untrue person has these two qualities they keep themselves broken and
damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people,
and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of
criticism and they praise those deserving of praise. When an astute,
competent true person has these two qualities they keep themselves
healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and criticized by
sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an2.135">

##### 135 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What two? Without
examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are dubious,
and they don't arouse faith in things that are inspiring. When a
foolish, incompetent untrue person has these two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
After examining or scrutinizing, they don't arouse faith in things that
are dubious, and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. When
an astute, competent true person has these two qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an2.136">

##### 136 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness. What two? Mother and father. When a foolish, incompetent
untrue person acts wrongly toward these two people they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two people
they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
Mother and father. When an astute, competent true person acts rightly
toward these two people they keep themselves healthy and whole. They
don't deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they
create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an2.137">

##### 137 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness. What two? The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized
One. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward these
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two people
they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized One. When an astute,
competent true person acts rightly toward these two people they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an2.138">

##### 138 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Cleaning your own mind, and not
grasping at anything in the world. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.139">

##### 139 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Anger and acrimony. These are the
two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.140">

##### 140 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Dispelling anger and dispelling
acrimony. These are the two things."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-danavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Giving {#an2-danavagga.xhtml_an2-danavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-danavagga.xhtml_an2.141-150 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.141--150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Giving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.141">

##### 141 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two gifts. What two? A gift of things of the flesh and
a gift of the teaching. These are the two gifts. The better of these two
gifts is the gift of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.142">

##### 142 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two offerings. What two? An offering of things of the
flesh and an offering of the teaching. These are the two offerings. The
better of these two offerings is an offering of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.143">

##### 143 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two acts of generosity. What two? Generosity with
things of the flesh and generosity with the teaching. These are the two
acts of generosity. The better of these two acts of generosity is
generosity with the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.144">

##### 144 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of charity. What two? Charity in things of
the flesh and charity in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
charity. The better of these two kinds of charity is a charity in the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.145">

##### 145 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two riches. What two? Riches in things of the flesh and
riches in the teaching. These are the two riches. The better of these
two riches is riches in the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.146">

##### 146 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of enjoyment. What two? Enjoyment of things
of the flesh and enjoyment of the teaching. These are the two kinds of
enjoyment. The better of these two kinds of enjoyment is the enjoyment
of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.147">

##### 147 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of sharing. What two? Sharing things of the
flesh and sharing the teaching. These are the two kinds of sharing. The
better of these two kinds of sharing is sharing the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.148">

##### 148 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of inclusion. What two? Inclusion in things
of the flesh and inclusion in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
inclusion. The better of these two kinds of inclusion is inclusion in
the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.149">

##### 149 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of support. What two? Support in things of
the flesh and support in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
support. The better of these two kinds of support is support in the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.150">

##### 150 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of sympathy. What two? Sympathy in things of
the flesh and sympathy in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
sympathy. The better of these two kinds of sympathy is sympathy in the
teaching."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-santharavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Welcome {#an2-santharavagga.xhtml_an2-santharavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-santharavagga.xhtml_an2.151-162 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.151--162]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Welcome ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Santhāravagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.151">

##### 151 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of welcome. What two? Welcome in things of
the flesh and welcome in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
welcome. The better of these two kinds of welcome is the welcome in the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.152">

##### 152 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of hospitality. What two? Hospitality in
things of the flesh and hospitality in the teaching. These are the two
kinds of hospitality. The better of these two kinds of hospitality is
hospitality in the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.153">

##### 153 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two quests. What two? The quest for things of the flesh
and the quest for the teaching. These are the two quests. The better of
these two quests is the quest for the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.154">

##### 154 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two searches. What two? The search for things of the
flesh and the search for the teaching. These are the two searches. The
better of these two searches is the search for the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.155">

##### 155 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of seeking. What two? Seeking for things of
the flesh and seeking for the teaching. These are the two kinds of
seeking. The better of these two kinds of seeking is seeking for the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.156">

##### 156 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of worship. What two? Worship of things of
the flesh and worship of the teaching. These are the two kinds of
worship. The better of these two kinds of worship is worship of the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.157">

##### 157 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two ways of serving guests. What two? Serving guests
with things of the flesh and serving guests with the teaching. These are
the two ways of serving guests. The better of these two ways of serving
guests is to serve them with the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.158">

##### 158 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two successes. What two? Success in things
of the flesh and success in the teaching. These are the two successes.
The better of these two successes is success in the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.159">

##### 159 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of growth. What two? Growth in
things of the flesh and growth in the teaching. These are the two kinds
of growth. The better of these two kinds of growth is growth in the
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.160">

##### 160 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two treasures. What two? The treasure of things of the
flesh and the treasure of the teaching. These are the two treasures. The
better of these two treasures is the treasure of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.161">

##### 161 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two kinds of accumulation. What two? Accumulation of
things of the flesh and accumulation of the teaching. These are the two
kinds of accumulation. The better of these two kinds of accumulation is
the accumulation of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an2.162">

##### 162 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of increase. What two? Increase
in things of the flesh and increase in the teaching. These are the two
kinds of increase. The better of these two kinds of increase is increase
in the teaching."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-samapattivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Attainment {#an2-samapattivagga.xhtml_an2-samapattivagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-samapattivagga.xhtml_an2.163-179 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.163--179]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter on Attainment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samāpattivagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.163">

##### 163 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Skill in meditative attainments
and skill in emerging from those attainments. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.164">

##### 164 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Integrity and gentleness. These
are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.165">

##### 165 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Patience and sweetness. These are
the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.166">

##### 166 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Friendliness and hospitality.
These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.167">

##### 167 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Harmlessness and purity. These
are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.168">

##### 168 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Not guarding the sense doors and
eating too much. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.169">

##### 169 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Guarding the sense doors and
moderation in eating. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.170">

##### 170 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? The power of reflection and the
power of development. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.171">

##### 171 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? The power of mindfulness and the
power of immersion. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.172">

##### 172 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Serenity and discernment. These
are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.173">

##### 173 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Failure in ethical conduct and
failure in view. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.174">

##### 174 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Accomplishment in ethical conduct
and accomplishment in view. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.175">

##### 175 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Purification of ethics and
purification of view. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.176">

##### 176 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Purification of view and making
an effort in line with that view. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.177">

##### 177 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? To never be content with skillful
qualities, and to never stop trying. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.178">

##### 178 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Lack of mindfulness and lack of
situational awareness. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.179">

##### 179 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Mindfulness and situational
awareness. These are the two things."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-peyyala.xhtml}

## Abbreviated Texts {#an2-peyyala.xhtml_an2-peyyala .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Anger {#an2-peyyala.xhtml_an2-kodhapeyyalavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-peyyala.xhtml_an2.180-229 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.180--229]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Anger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kodhapeyyālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.180-184">

##### 180--184 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Anger and acrimony ... disdain
and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit and deviousness ...
lack of conscience and prudence. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.185-189">

##### 185--189 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"There are these two things. What two? Freedom from anger and acrimony
... freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom from jealousy and
stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ... conscience and
prudence. These are the two things."

</article>
<article id="an2.190-194">

##### 190--194 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Anyone who has two things lives in suffering. What two? Anger and
acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit
and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. Anyone who has
these two things lives in suffering."

</article>
<article id="an2.195-199">

##### 195--199 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Anyone who has these two things lives happily. What two? Freedom from
anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom
from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ...
conscience and prudence. Anyone who has these two things lives happily."

</article>
<article id="an2.200-204">

##### 200--204 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What two?
Anger and acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess
... deceit and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. These
two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an2.205-209">

##### 205--209 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"These two things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
two? Freedom from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and
contempt ... freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from
deceit and deviousness ... conscience and prudence. These two things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an2.210-214">

##### 210--214 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Anyone who has two things is cast down to hell. What two? Anger and
acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit
and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. Anyone who has
these two things is cast down to hell."

</article>
<article id="an2.215-219">

##### 215--219 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Anyone who has two things is raised up to heaven. What two? Freedom
from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt ...
freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and
deviousness ... conscience and prudence. Anyone who has these two things
is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an2.220-224">

##### 220--224 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. What two? Anger and acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy
and stinginess ... deceit and deviousness ... lack of conscience and
prudence. When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks
up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an2.225-229">

##### 225--229 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"When they have two things, some people---when their body breaks up,
after death---are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. What two?
Freedom from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt
... freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and
deviousness ... conscience and prudence. When they have these two
things, some people---when their body breaks up, after death---are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-akusalapeyyalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With the Unskillful {#an2-akusalapeyyalavagga.xhtml_an2-akusalapeyyalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article class="range" id="an2.230-279">

#### [AN 2.230--279]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With the Unskillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalapeyyālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

"These two things are unskillful ... are skillful ... are blameworthy
... are blameless ... have suffering as outcome ... have happiness as
outcome ... result in suffering ... result in happiness ... are hurtful
... are not hurtful. What two? Freedom from anger and acrimony ...
freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom from jealousy and
stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ... conscience and
prudence. These are the two things that are not hurtful."

</article>

[]{#an2-vinayapeyyalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Monastic Law {#an2-vinayapeyyalavagga.xhtml_an2-vinayapeyyalavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-vinayapeyyalavagga.xhtml_an2.280-309 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.280--309]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Monastic Law ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vinayapeyyālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.280">

##### 280 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For two reasons the Realized One laid down training rules for his
disciples.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha ... For keeping
difficult persons in check and for the comfort of good-hearted
mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect the present life
and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ... For
restraining threats to the present life and protecting against threats
to lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect the present life
and protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For
restraining hazards that affect the present life and protecting against
hazards that affect lives to come ... For restraining unskillful
qualities that affect the present life and protecting against unskillful
qualities that affect lives to come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople
and for breaking up factions of mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For
inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in
those who have it ... For the continuation of the true teaching and the
support of the training. These are the two reasons why the Realized One
laid down training rules for his disciples."

</article>
<article id="an2.281-309">

##### 281--309 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For two reasons the Realized One laid down for his disciples the
monastic code ... the recitation of the monastic code ... the suspension
of the recitation of the monastic code ... the invitation to admonish
... the setting aside of the invitation to admonish ... the disciplinary
act of condemnation ... placing under dependence ... banishment ...
reconciliation ... debarment ... probation ... being sent back to the
beginning ... penance ... reinstatement ... restoration ... removal ...
ordination ... an act with a motion ... an act with a motion and one
announcement ... an act with a motion and three announcements ... laying
down what was not previously laid down ... amending what was laid down
... the settling of a disciplinary matter by the following methods:
face-to-face ... through recollection ... because of past insanity ...
acting according to what has been admitted ... majority decision ...
further penalty... covering over as if with grass.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha ... For keeping
difficult persons in check and for the comfort of good-hearted
mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect the present life
and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ... For
restraining threats to the present life and protecting against threats
to lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect the present life
and protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For
restraining hazards that affect the present life and protecting against
hazards that affect lives to come ... For restraining unskillful
qualities that affect the present life and protecting against unskillful
qualities that affect lives to come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople
and for breaking up factions of mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For
inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in
those who have it ... For the continuation of the true teaching and the
support of the training.

These are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down the settlement
of a disciplinary matter by covering over with grass for his disciples."

</article>
:::

[]{#an2-ragapeyyalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed {#an2-ragapeyyalavagga.xhtml_an2-ragapeyyalavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an2-ragapeyyalavagga.xhtml_an2.310-479 .section .range}
#### [AN 2.310--479]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rāgapeyyālavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an2.310-319">

##### 310--319 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"For insight into greed, two things should be developed. What two?
Serenity and discernment. For insight into greed, these two things
should be developed."

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, two things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an2.320-479">

##### 320--479 {.sutta-title .subheading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... two things should be developed. What two? Serenity and
discernment. For the letting go of negligence, these two things should
be developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Twos is finished.

</article>
:::

[]{#an3.xhtml}

# The Book of the Threes {#an3.xhtml_an3 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an3-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an3-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an3-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Fools {#an3-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an3-balavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.1">

#### [AN 3.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perils ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute. It's like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds
or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out,
draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. In the same way,
whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute.

So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe. The fool is
perilous, but the astute person is not. The fool is hazardous, but the
astute person is not. There's no danger, peril, or hazard that comes
from the astute.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.2">

#### [AN 3.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Characteristics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lakkhaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is
characterized by their deeds, for wisdom shows in its traces. A fool is
known by three things. What three? Bad conduct by way of body, speech,
and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.3">

#### [AN 3.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Thinking ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cintīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a
fool. What three? A fool thinks poorly, speaks poorly, and acts poorly.
If a fool didn't think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then how
would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an untrue
person'? But since a fool does think poorly, speak poorly, and act
poorly, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an
untrue person'. These are the three characteristics, signs, and
manifestations of a fool.

There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an
astute person. What three? An astute person thinks well, speaks well,
and acts well. If an astute person didn't think well, speak well, and
act well, then how would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is
astute, a true person'? But since an astute person does think well,
speak well, and act well, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow
is astute, a true person'. These are the three characteristics, signs,
and manifestations of an astute person. So you should train ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.4">

#### [AN 3.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mistakes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Accayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They don't recognize when
they've made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don't deal with
it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they
don't accept it properly.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They recognize
when they've made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it
properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept
it properly.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.5">

#### [AN 3.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Irrational ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ayonisosutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They ask a question
irrationally. They answer a question irrationally. And when someone else
answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they disagree with it.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They ask a
question rationally. They answer a question rationally. And when someone
else answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they agree with it.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.6">

#### [AN 3.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unskillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Unskillful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Skillful deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.7">

#### [AN 3.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāvajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Blameworthy deeds by way
of body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by blameless
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.8">

#### [AN 3.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hurtful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sabyābajjhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Hurtful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by kind deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things by which an
astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three qualities by
which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three
qualities by which an astute person is known.' That's how you should
train."

</article>
<article id="an3.9">

#### [AN 3.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent, untrue person has three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What
three? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What three?
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When an astute, competent true person has these three qualities they
keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an3.10">

#### [AN 3.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Malasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Anyone who has three qualities, and has not given up three stains, is
cast down to hell. What three? They're unethical, and haven't given up
the stain of immorality. They're jealous, and haven't given up the stain
of jealousy. They're stingy, and haven't given up the stain of
stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has not given up these three
stains, is cast down to hell.

Anyone who has three qualities, and has given up three stains, is raised
up to heaven. What three? They're ethical, and have given up the stain
of immorality. They're not jealous, and have given up the stain of
jealousy. They're not stingy, and have given up the stain of stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has given up these three
stains, is raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an3-rathakaravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Chariot-maker {#an3-rathakaravagga.xhtml_an3-rathakaravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.11">

#### [AN 3.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Well-known ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ñātasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting
for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for
the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. What three? They
encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that don't
reinforce good qualities.

A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

A well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the welfare
and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans. What three? They encourage deeds of
body and speech, as well as principles, that reinforce good qualities.

A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the
welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an3.12">

#### [AN 3.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Commemoration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"An anointed aristocratic king should commemorate three places as long
as he lives. What three? The place he was born. This is the first place.

The place he was anointed as king. This is the second place.

The place where he won victory in battle, establishing himself as
foremost in battle. This is the third place. These are the three places
an anointed king should commemorate as long as he lives.

In the same way, a mendicant should commemorate three places as long as
they live. What three? The place where the mendicant shaved off their
hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life
to homelessness. This is the first place.

The place where the mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. This is the second place.

The place where the mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
third place. These are the three places a mendicant should commemorate
as long as they live."

</article>
<article id="an3.13">

#### [AN 3.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hopes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? The hopeless,
the hopeful, and the one who has done away with hope. And what,
mendicants, is a hopeless person? It's when a person is reborn in a low
family---a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters,
chariot-makers, or scavengers---poor, with little to eat or drink, where
life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. And they're ugly,
unsightly, deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or
half-paralyzed. They don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and
vehicles; garlands, fragrances, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting.
They hear this: 'They say the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat
named so-and-so as king.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will the
aristocrats anoint me too as king?' This is called a hopeless person.

And what, mendicants, is a hopeful person? It's when some person is the
eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has not yet been
anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the succession. He
hears this: 'They say that the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat
named so-and-so as king.' It occurs to him: 'Oh, when will the
aristocrats anoint me too as king?' This is called a hopeful person.

And what, mendicants, is a person who has done away with hope? It's when
a king has been anointed. He hears this: 'They say that the aristocrats
have anointed the aristocrat named so-and-so as king.' It never occurs
to him: 'Oh, when will the aristocrats anoint me too as king?' Why is
that? Because the former hope he had to be anointed has now died down.
This is called a person who has done away with hope.

These are the three people found in the world.

In the same way, these three people are found among the mendicants. What
three? The hopeless, the hopeful, and the one who has done away with
hope. And what, mendicants, is a hopeless person? It's when a person is
unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior,
underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner---though claiming
to be one---rotten inside, festering, and depraved. They hear this:
'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will I too realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' This is called a hopeless person.

And what, mendicants, is a hopeful person? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, of good character. They hear this: 'They say that the mendicant
named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' It occurs to them: 'Oh,
when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' This is called a hopeful
person.

And what, mendicants, is a person who has done away with hope? It's when
a mendicant is a perfected one, who has ended all defilements. They hear
this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will I too realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' Why is that? Because the former hope they had to be freed
has now died down. This is called a person who has done away with hope.

These are the three people found among the mendicants."

</article>
<article id="an3.14">

#### [AN 3.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Wheel-Turning Monarch ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cakkavattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king,
does not wield power without having their own king." When he said this,
one of the mendicants asked the Buddha:

"But who is the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and
principled king?"

"It is principle, monk," said the Buddha.

"Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for
his court, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and
authority.

He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals,
troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics
and brahmins, beasts and birds. When he has done this, he wields power
only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any
human enemy.

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security regarding bodily actions, relying only on principle---honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag,
banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily action should be cultivated.
This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated.'

Furthermore, a Realized One ... provides just protection and security
regarding verbal actions, saying: 'This kind of verbal action should be
cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be cultivated.' ...
And regarding mental actions: 'This kind of mental action should be
cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be cultivated.'

And when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
provided just protection and security regarding actions of body, speech,
and mind, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel
cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā
or by anyone in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.15">

#### [AN 3.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Pacetana ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sacetanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Once upon a time there was a king named Pacetana. Then King Pacetana
addressed his chariot-maker, 'In six months' time, my good
chariot-maker, there will be a battle. Are you able to make me a new
pair of wheels?'

'I can, Your Majesty,' replied the chariot-maker. Then, when it was six
days less than six months later, the chariot-maker had finished one
wheel.

Then King Pacetana addressed his chariot-maker, 'In six days' time there
will be a battle. Is my new pair of wheels finished?'

'Now that it is six days less than six months, Your Majesty, I have
finished one wheel.'

'Are you able to finish the second wheel in these six days?'

Saying, 'I can, Your Majesty,' the chariot-maker finished the second
wheel in six days. Taking the pair of wheels he went up to King
Pacetana, and said this to the king, 'Your Majesty, these are your two
new wheels, finished.'

'But, my good chariot-maker, what is the difference between the wheel
that was finished in six days less than six months, and the wheel
finished in just six days? Because I can't see any difference between
them.'

'But, Your Majesty, there is a difference. See now what it is.'

Then the chariot-maker rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in
six days. It rolled as far as the original impetus took it, then wobbled
and fell down. Then he rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in
six days less than six months. It rolled as far as the original impetus
took it, then stood still as if fixed to an axle.

'But what is the cause, my good chariot-maker, what is the reason why
the wheel that was finished in six days wobbled and fell, while the one
that was finished in six days less than six months stood still as if
fixed to an axle?'

'The wheel that was finished in six days, Your Majesty, is crooked,
flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub. That's why it wobbled and
fell. The wheel that was finished in six days less than six months, Your
Majesty, is not crooked, flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub.
That's why it stood still as if fixed to an axle.'

Now, mendicants, you might think: 'Surely that chariot-maker must have
been someone else at that time?' But you should not see it like that. I
myself was the chariot-maker at that time. Then I was skilled in the
crooks, flaws, and defects of wood.

Now that I am a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, I am skilled in
the crooks, flaws, and defects of actions by body, speech, and mind.
Whatever monk or nun has not given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of
body, speech, and mind has fallen from the teaching and training, just
like the wheel that was finished in six days.

Whatever monk or nun has given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of
body, speech, and mind is established in the teaching and training, just
like the wheel that was finished in six days less than six months.

So you should train like this: 'We will give up the crooks, flaws, and
defects of body, speech, and mind.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.16">

#### [AN 3.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unfailing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Apaṇṇakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has three things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What three? It's when a mendicant guards the sense doors, eats in
moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness.

And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? When a mendicant sees a
sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight,
and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how a mendicant
guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? It's when a mendicant
reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' That's
how a mendicant eats in moderation.

And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? It's when a mendicant
practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind
from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle watch, they lie
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.
In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and
sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. This is how a
mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness.

When a mendicant has these three things their practice is unfailing, and
they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an3.17">

#### [AN 3.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hurting Yourself ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Attabyābādhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three things, mendicants, lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, and hurting both. What three? Bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind.

These are three things that lead to hurting yourself, hurting others,
and hurting both.

These three things, mendicants, don't lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, or hurting both. What three? Good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind.

These are three things that don't lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, or hurting both."

</article>
<article id="an3.18">

#### [AN 3.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Realm of the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devalokasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverend, do you lead the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama so
that you can be reborn in the realm of the gods?' Being questioned like
this, wouldn't you be horrified, repelled, and disgusted?"

"Yes, sir."

"So it seems that you are horrified, repelled, and disgusted by heavenly
lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty. How much more then
should you be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted by bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind."

</article>
<article id="an3.19">

#### [AN 3.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Shopkeeper (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapāpaṇikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors is unable to acquire
more wealth or to increase the wealth they've already acquired. What
three? It's when a shopkeeper doesn't carefully focus on their work in
the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. A shopkeeper who has these
three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth
they've already acquired.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is unable to
acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities
they've already acquired. What three? It's when a mendicant doesn't
carefully focus on a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the
morning, at midday, and in the afternoon.

A mendicant who has these three qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired.

A shopkeeper who has three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to
increase the wealth they've already acquired. What three? It's when a
shopkeeper carefully focuses on their work in the morning, at midday,
and in the afternoon. A shopkeeper who has these three factors is able
to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they've already
acquired.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is able to acquire
more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've
already acquired. What three? It's when a mendicant carefully focuses on
a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the morning, at midday,
and in the afternoon.

A mendicant who has these three qualities is able to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired."

</article>
<article id="an3.20">

#### [AN 3.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Shopkeeper (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapāpaṇikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors soon acquires great and
abundant wealth. What three? It's when a shopkeeper sees clearly, is
indefatigable, and has supporters.

And how does a shopkeeper see clearly? It's when a shopkeeper knows of a
product: 'This product is bought at this price and is selling at this
price. With this much investment, it'll bring this much profit.' That's
how a shopkeeper sees clearly.

And how is a shopkeeper indefatigable? It's when a shopkeeper is skilled
in buying and selling products. That's how a shopkeeper is
indefatigable.

And how does a shopkeeper have supporters? It's when rich, affluent, and
wealthy householders or householders' children know of him: 'This good
shopkeeper sees clearly and is indefatigable. They are capable of
providing for their wives and children, and paying us back from time to
time.' They deposit money with the shopkeeper, saying: 'With this,
friend shopkeeper, earn money to raise your wives and children, and pay
us back from time to time.' That's how a shopkeeper has supporters.

A shopkeeper who has these three factors soon acquires great and
abundant wealth.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities soon acquires great
and abundant skillful qualities. What three? It's when a mendicant sees
clearly, is indefatigable, and has supporters.

And how does a mendicant see clearly? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant sees
clearly.

And how is a mendicant indefatigable? It's when a mendicant lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking
off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a
mendicant is indefatigable.

And how does a mendicant have supporters? It's when from time to time a
mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors
of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and
the outlines---and asks them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a mendicant has supporters.

A mendicant who has these three qualities soon acquires great and
abundant skillful qualities."

</article>

[]{#an3-puggalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Persons {#an3-puggalavagga.xhtml_an3-puggalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.21">

#### [AN 3.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saviṭṭha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samiddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Saviṭṭha and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to Venerable
Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side and Venerable Sāriputta said to Venerable Saviṭṭha, "Reverend
Saviṭṭha, these three people are found in the world. What three? The
direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith.
These are the three people found in the world. Of these three people,
who do you believe to be the finest?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, these three people are found in the world. What
three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed
by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of these three
people, I believe the person freed by faith to be finest. Why is that?
Because this person's faculty of faith is outstanding."

Then Sāriputta said to Mahākoṭṭhita, "Reverend Koṭṭhika, these three
people are found in the world. What three? The direct witness, the one
attained to view, and the one freed by faith. These are the three people
found in the world. Of these three people, who do you believe to be the
finest?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, these three people are found in the world. What
three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed
by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of these three
people, I believe the direct witness to be finest. Why is that? Because
this person's faculty of immersion is outstanding."

Then Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta, "Reverend Sāriputta, these three
people are found in the world. What three? The direct witness, the one
attained to view, and the one freed by faith. These are the three people
found in the world. Of these three people, who do you believe to be the
finest?"

"Reverend Koṭṭhika, these three people are found in the world. What
three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed
by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of these three
people, I believe the person attained to view to be finest. Why is that?
Because this person's faculty of wisdom is outstanding."

Then Sāriputta said to Saviṭṭha and Mahākoṭṭhita, "Each of us has spoken
from the heart. Come, reverends, let's go to the Buddha, and tell him
about this. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Then Sāriputta, Saviṭṭha, and
Mahākoṭṭhita went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.
Then Sāriputta told the Buddha of all they had discussed.

"In this matter, Sāriputta, it's not easy to categorically declare that
one of these three people is finest. In some cases, a person who is
freed by faith is practicing for perfection, while the direct witness
and the one attained to view are once-returners or non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest. In some cases, a direct witness is practicing
for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the one attained to
view are once-returners or non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest. In some cases, one attained to view is
practicing for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the direct
witness are once-returners or non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest."

</article>
<article id="an3.22">

#### [AN 3.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Patients ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gilānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three patients are found in the world. What three?

In some cases a patient won't recover from an illness, regardless of
whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable
carer.

In some cases a patient will recover from an illness, regardless of
whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable
carer.

In some cases a patient can recover from an illness, but only if they
get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer, and not if they
don't get these things.

Now, it's for the sake of the last patient---who will recover only if
they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer---that food,
medicines, and a carer are prescribed. But also, for the sake of this
patient, the other patients should be looked after.

These are the three kinds of patients found in the world.

In the same way, these three people similar to patients are found in the
world. What three? Some people don't enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities, regardless of whether or not they get to see a
Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims.

Some people do enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities,
regardless of whether or not they get to see a Realized One, and to hear
the teaching and training that he proclaims.

Some people can enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities,
but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and
training that he proclaims, and not when they don't get those things.

Now, it's for the sake of this last person that teaching the Dhamma is
prescribed, that is, the one who can enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities, but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to
hear the teaching and training that he proclaims. But also, for the sake
of this person, the other people should be taught Dhamma.

These are the three people similar to patients found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.23">

#### [AN 3.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Choices ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅkhārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three people are found in the world. What three?

Firstly, a certain person makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech,
and mind. Having made these choices, they're reborn in a hurtful world,
where hurtful contacts strike them. Touched by hurtful contacts, they
experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively painful---like the
beings in hell.

Furthermore, another person makes pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are reborn in a
pleasing world, where pleasing contacts strike them. Touched by pleasing
contacts, they experience pleasing feelings that are exclusively
happy---like the gods of universal beauty.

Furthermore, another person makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by
way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are
reborn in a world that is both hurtful and pleasing, where hurtful and
pleasing contacts strike them. Touched by both hurtful and pleasing
contacts, they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a
mixture of pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.24">

#### [AN 3.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Very Helpful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahukārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three people are very helpful to another. What three?

The person who has enabled you to go for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha. This person is very helpful to another.

Furthermore, the person who has enabled you to truly understand: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This person is very helpful to another.

Furthermore, the person who has enabled you to realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with your own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This person is very helpful to another.

These are the three people who are very helpful to another person.

And I say that there is no-one more helpful to another than these three
people. And I also say that it's not easy to repay these three people by
bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with joined
palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them
with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick."

</article>
<article id="an3.25">

#### [AN 3.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Like Diamond ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vajirūpamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? A person with a
mind like an open sore, a person with a mind like lightning, and a
person with a mind like diamond.

And who has a mind like an open sore? It's a person who is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. They're like a festering sore, which, when you hit
it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. In the same way, a
person is irritable and bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they
lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they
display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. This is called a person with a
mind like an open sore.

And who has a mind like lightning? It's a person who truly understands:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. They're like a person with keen eyes in the
dark of the night, who sees by a flash of lightning. In the same way, a
person truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called a
person with a mind like lightning.

And who has a mind like diamond? It's a person who realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. It's like a diamond, which can't be cut by anything at all,
not even a gem or a stone. In the same way, a person realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ...
This is called a person with a mind like diamond.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.26">

#### [AN 3.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Associates ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sevitabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? There is a
person you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend. There is a
person you should associate with, accompany, and attend. There is a
person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and
respect.

Who is the person you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend?
It's a person who is inferior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom.
You shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend such a person, except
out of kindness and sympathy.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? It's
a person who is similar in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. You
should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. Why is that?
Thinking, 'Since our ethical conduct is similar, we can discuss ethics,
the conversation will flow, and we'll both be at ease. Since our
immersion is similar, we can discuss immersion, the conversation will
flow, and we'll both be at ease. Since our wisdom is similar, we can
discuss wisdom, the conversation will flow, and we'll both be at ease.'
That's why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a
person.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with
honor and respect? It's a person who is superior in terms of ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. You should associate with, accompany, and attend
such a person with honor and respect. Why is that? Thinking, 'I'll
fulfill the entire spectrum of ethical conduct I haven't yet fulfilled,
or support with wisdom in every situation the ethical conduct I've
already fulfilled. I'll fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion I
haven't yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the
immersion I've already fulfilled. I'll fulfill the entire spectrum of
wisdom I haven't yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every
situation the wisdom I've already fulfilled.' That's why you should
associate with, accompany, and attend this person with honor and
respect.

These are the three people found in the world.

> A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill,\
> but associating with an equal, you'll never decline;\
> following the best, you'll quickly rise up,\
> so you should keep company `<j>`{=html}with people better than you."
> `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an3.27">

#### [AN 3.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [You Should be Disgusted ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jigucchitabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? There is a
person who you should be disgusted by, and you shouldn't associate with,
accompany, or attend them. There is a person you should regard with
equanimity, and you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them.
There is a person you should associate with, accompany, and attend.

Who is the person you should be disgusted by, and not associate with,
accompany, or attend? It's a person who is unethical, of bad qualities,
filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or
spiritual practitioner---though claiming to be one---rotten inside,
festering, and depraved. You should be disgusted by such a person, and
you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them. Why is that?
Even if you don't follow the example of such a person, you still get a
bad reputation: 'That individual has bad friends, companions, and
associates.' They're like a snake that's been living in a pile of dung.
Even if it doesn't bite, it'll still rub off on you. In the same way,
even if you don't follow the example of such a person, you still get a
bad reputation: 'That individual has bad friends, companions, and
associates.' That's why you should be disgusted by such a person, and
you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them.

Who is the person you should regard with equanimity, and not associate
with, accompany, or attend? It's a person who is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. They're like a festering sore, which, when you hit
it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. In the same way,
someone is irritable and bad-tempered. They're like a firebrand of
pale-moon ebony, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, sizzles
and crackles even more. In the same way, someone is irritable and
bad-tempered. They're like a sewer, which, when you stir it with a stick
or a stone, stinks even more. In the same way, a person is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. You should regard such a person with equanimity,
and you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them. Why is
that? Thinking, 'They might abuse or insult me, or do me harm.' That's
why you should regard such a person with equanimity, and you shouldn't
associate with, accompany, or attend them.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? It's
a person who is ethical, of good character. You should associate with,
accompany, and attend such a person. Why is that? Even if you don't
follow the example of such a person, you still get a good reputation:
'That individual has good friends, companions, and associates.' That's
why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person.

These are the three people found in the world.

> A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill,\
> but associating with an equal, you'll never decline;\
> following the best, you'll quickly rise up,\
> so you should keep company `<j>`{=html}with people better than you."
> `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an3.28">

#### [AN 3.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Speech like Dung ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gūthabhāṇīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three kinds of people are found in the world. What three? One
with speech like dung, one with speech like flowers, and one with speech
like honey.

And who has speech like dung? It's a person who is summoned to a
council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court,
and asked to bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not
knowing, they say 'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not
seeing, they say 'I see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they
deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some
trivial worldly reason. This is called a person with speech like dung.

And who has speech like flowers? It's a person who is summoned to a
council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court,
and asked to bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not
knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not
seeing, they say 'I don't see.' And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they
don't deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for
some trivial worldly reason. This is called a person with speech like
flowers.

And who has speech like honey? It's a person who gives up harsh speech.
They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to
the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. This is called a
person with speech like honey.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.29">

#### [AN 3.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Andhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three are found in the world. What three? The blind, the
one-eyed, and the two-eyed.

Who is the blind person? It's someone who doesn't have the kind of
vision that's needed to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth
they've already acquired. Nor do they have the kind of vision that's
needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and
unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those
on the side of dark and bright. This is called a blind person.

Who is the person with one eye? It's someone who has the kind of vision
that's needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they've
already acquired. But they don't have the kind of vision that's needed
to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and
unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those
on the side of dark and bright. This is called a one-eyed person.

Who is the person with two eyes? It's someone who has the kind of vision
that's needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they've
already acquired. And they have the kind of vision that's needed to know
the difference between skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and
blameless, inferior and superior, or qualities on the side of dark and
bright. This is called a two-eyed person.

These are the three people found in the world.

> Neither suitable wealth,\
> nor merit do they make.\
> They hold a losing hand on both counts,\
> those who are blind, with ruined eyes.
>
> And now the one-eyed\
> person is explained.\
> By methods good and bad,\
> that devious person seeks wealth.
>
> Both by fraudulent, thieving deeds,\
> and also by lies,\
> the young man's skilled at piling up money,\
> and enjoying sensual pleasures.\
> From here they go to hell---\
> the one-eyed person is ruined.
>
> And now the two-eyed is explained,\
> the best individual.\
> Their wealth is earned legitimately,\
> money acquired by their own hard work.
>
> They give with best of intentions,\
> that peaceful-hearted person.\
> They go to a good place,\
> where there is no sorrow.
>
> The blind and the one-eyed,\
> you should avoid from afar.\
> But you should keep the two-eyed close,\
> the best individual."

</article>
<article id="an3.30">

#### [AN 3.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Upside-down ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avakujjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These three are found in the world. What three? One with upside-down
wisdom, one with wisdom on their lap, and one with widespread wisdom.

And who is the person with upside-down wisdom? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. But even while sitting there, that person doesn't apply the
mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. And when they
get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning,
middle, or end of the discussion. It's like when a pot full of water is
tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn't stay. In the same way,
a person often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the
presence of the mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good
in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful
and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure. But even while sitting there, that person doesn't apply
the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, or end. And when
they get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning,
middle, or end of the discussion. This is called a person with
upside-down wisdom.

And who is the person with wisdom on their lap? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. But when they get up from
their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end
of the discussion. It's like a person who has different kinds of food
crammed on their lap---such as sesame, rice, sweets, or jujube---so that
if they get up from the seat without mindfulness, everything gets
scattered. In the same way, a person often goes to the monastery to hear
the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. The mendicants teach
them Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual
practice that's entirely full and pure. While sitting there, that person
applies the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end.
But when they get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the
beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. This is called a person
with wisdom on their lap.

And who is the person with widespread wisdom? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. And when they get up from
their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or
end of the discussion. It's like when a pot full of water is set
straight, so the water stays and doesn't drain out. In the same way, a
person often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence
of the mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. And when they get up from
their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or
end of the discussion. This is called a person with widespread wisdom.

These three are found in the world.

> A person with upside-down wisdom,\
> is stupid and cannot see,\
> and even if they frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can't learn\
> the beginning, middle, or end\
> of the discussion,\
> for their wisdom is lacking.
>
> The person with wisdom on their lap\
> is better than that, it's said;\
> but even if they frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can only learn\
> the beginning, middle, and end\
> while sitting in that seat;\
> but they've only grasped the phrasing,\
> for when they get up their understanding fails,\
> and what they've learned is lost.
>
> The person with widespread wisdom\
> is better than that, it's said;\
> and if they, too, frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can learn\
> the beginning, middle, and end\
> while sitting in that seat;\
> and when they've grasped the phrasing,
>
> they remember it with the best of intentions.\
> That peaceful-hearted person,\
> practicing in line with the teaching,\
> would make an end of suffering."

</article>

[]{#an3-devadutavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Messengers of the Gods {#an3-devadutavagga.xhtml_an3-devadutavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.31">

#### [AN 3.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Brahmā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sabrahmakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their
home is said to live with Brahmā. A family where the children honor
their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors. A
family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to
live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.

'Brahmā' is a term for your parents.

'First tutors' is a term for your parents.

'Worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods' is a term for your parents.

Why is that? Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise
them, nurture them, and show them the world.

> Parents are said to be 'Brahmā'\
> and 'first tutors', it's said.\
> They're worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods `<j>`{=html}from
> their children, `</j>`{=html}\
> for they love their offspring.
>
> Therefore an astute person\
> would revere them and honor them\
> with food and drink,\
> clothes and bedding,\
> anointing and bathing,\
> and by washing their feet.
>
> Because they look after\
> their parents like this,\
> in this life they're praised by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an3.32">

#### [AN 3.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such
that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit
for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying
tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd live
having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more?"

"It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant gains a state of immersion such
that they have no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd
live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more."

"But how could this be, sir?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant thinks: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how, Ānanda, a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such
that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit
for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying
tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd live
having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more.

And Ānanda, this is what I was referring to in 'The Way to the Far
Shore', in 'The Questions of Puṇṇaka' when I said:

> 'Having appraised the world high and low,\
> there is nothing in the world that disturbs them.\
> Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, `<j>`{=html}with no need for
> hope---`</j>`{=html}\
> they've crossed over rebirth and old age, I declare.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.33">

#### [AN 3.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sāriputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāriputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to him, "Maybe I'll teach Dhamma in brief,
maybe in detail, maybe both in brief and in detail. But it's hard to
find anyone who understands."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
teach Dhamma in brief, in detail, and both in brief and in detail. There
will be those who understand the teaching!"

"So, Sāriputta, you should train like this: 'There'll be no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body;
and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for all
external stimuli; and we'll live having achieved the freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying
tendency to conceit are no more.' That's how you should train.

When a mendicant has no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and they live
having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more---they're called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the
fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering.

And Sāriputta, this is what I was referring to in 'The Way to the Far
Shore', in 'The Questions of Udaya' when I said:

> 'The giving up of both\
> sensual desires and displeasures,\
> the dispelling of dullness,\
> and the prevention of remorse;
>
> pure equanimity and mindfulness,\
> preceded by investigation of principles---\
> this, I declare, is liberation by enlightenment,\
> the smashing of ignorance.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.34">

#### [AN 3.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sources ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.

Any deed that emerges from greed---born, sourced, and originated from
greed---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from hate---born, sourced, and originated from
hate---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that deed
ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or in
the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from delusion---born, sourced, and originated from
delusion---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile,
and well-kept. They're sown in a well-prepared, productive field, and
the heavens provide plenty of rain. Then those seeds would grow,
increase, and mature.

In the same way, any deed that emerges from greed---born, sourced, and
originated from greed---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And
wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the
present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from hate ...

Any deed that emerges from delusion---born, sourced, and originated from
delusion---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period. These are three sources
that give rise to deeds.

Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise
to deeds.

Any deed that emerges from contentment---born, sourced, and originated
from contentment---is given up when greed is done away with. It's cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future.

Any deed that emerges from love---born, sourced, and originated from
love---is abandoned when hate is done away with. It's cut off at the
root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the
future.

Any deed that emerges from understanding---born, sourced, and originated
from understanding---is abandoned when delusion is done away with. It's
cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future.

Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and sun,
fertile, and well-kept. But someone would burn them with fire, reduce
them to ashes, and sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream. Then those seeds would be cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

In the same way, any deed that emerges from contentment---born, sourced,
and originated from contentment---is abandoned when greed is done away
with. It's cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and
unable to arise in the future.

Any deed that emerges from love ... Any deed that emerges from
understanding---born, sourced, and originated from understanding---is
abandoned when delusion is done away with. It's cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

> When an ignorant person acts\
> out of greed, hate, or delusion,\
> any deeds they have done,\
> a little or a lot,\
> are to be experienced right here,\
> not in any other place.
>
> So a wise person,\
> a mendicant arousing knowledge\
> of the outcome of greed, hate, and delusion,\
> would cast off all bad destinies."

</article>
<article id="an3.35">

#### [AN 3.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Hatthaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Hatthakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī,
on a mat of leaves by a cow-path in a grove of Indian Rosewood.

Then as Hatthaka of Āḷavī was going for a walk he saw the Buddha sitting
on that mat of leaves. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said, "Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?"

"Yes, prince, I slept well. I am one of those who sleep at ease in the
world."

"The winter nights are cold, sir, and it's the week of mid-winter, when
the snow falls. Rough is the ground trampled under the cows' hooves, and
thin is the mat of leaves. The leaves are sparse on the trees, the ocher
robes are cold, and cold blows the north wind. And yet the Buddha says,
'Yes, prince, I slept well. I am one of those who sleep at ease in the
world.'"

"Well then, prince, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think? Take the case of a householder or
his son, who lives in a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free,
with door fastened and window shuttered. His couch is spread with woolen
covers---shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers---and
spread with a fine deer hide. It has a canopy above and red pillows at
both ends. An oil lamp is burning there, while his four wives attend to
him in all manner of agreeable ways. What do you think, prince, would he
sleep at ease, or not? Or how do you see this?"

"He would sleep at ease, sir. Of those who sleep at ease in the world,
he would be one."

"What do you think, prince? Is it not possible that a fever born of
greed---physical or mental---might arise in that householder or
householder's son, burning him so he sleeps badly?"

"Yes, sir."

"The greed that burns that householder or householder's son, making them
sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like
a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. That's why
I sleep at ease.

What do you think, prince? Is it not possible that a fever born of hate
... or a fever born of delusion---physical or mental---might arise in
that householder or householder's son, burning him so he sleeps badly?"

"Yes, sir."

"The delusion that burns that householder or householder's son, making
them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made
like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
That's why I sleep at ease.

> A brahmin who is fully quenched\
> always sleeps at ease.\
> Sensual pleasures slip off them,\
> they're cooled, free of attachments.
>
> Since they've cut off all clinging,\
> and removed the stress from the heart,\
> the peaceful sleep at ease,\
> having found peace of mind."

</article>
<article id="an3.36">

#### [AN 3.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Messengers of the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadūtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are, mendicants, these three messengers of the gods. What three?

Firstly, someone does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. The wardens of hell take them by the
arms and present them to King Yama, saying: 'Your Majesty, this person
did not pay due respect to their mother and father, ascetics and
brahmins, or honor the elders in the family. May Your Majesty punish
them!'

Then King Yama pursues, presses, and grills them about the first
messenger of the gods: 'Mister, did you not see the first messenger of
the gods that appeared among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings an
elderly woman or a man---eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old---bent
double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing,
past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin
wrinkled, and limbs blotchy?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to grow old. I'm not exempt
from old age. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Indeed, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the second messenger of the gods:
'Mister, did you not see the second messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.' King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you
not see among human beings a woman or a man, sick, suffering, gravely
ill, collapsed in their own urine and feces, being picked up by some and
put down by others?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to become sick. I'm not exempt
from sickness. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the third messenger of the gods:
'Mister, did you not see the third messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings a
woman or a man, dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and
festering?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to die. I'm not exempt from
death. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

After grilling them about the third messenger of the gods, King Yama
falls silent. The wardens of hell punish them with the five-fold
crucifixion. They drive red-hot stakes through the hands and feet, and
another in the middle of the chest. And there they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed
is eliminated.

The wardens of hell throw them down and hack them with axes. ...

They hang them upside-down and hack them with hatchets. ...

They harness them to a chariot, and drive them back and forth across
burning ground, blazing and glowing. ...

They make them climb up and down a huge mountain of burning coals,
blazing and glowing. ...

The wardens of hell turn them upside down and throw them in a red-hot
copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing. There they're seared in
boiling scum, and they're swept up and down and round and round. And
there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they
don't die until that bad deed is eliminated. The wardens of hell toss
them into the Great Hell.

Now, about that Great Hell:

> 'Four are its corners, four its doors,\
> neatly divided in equal parts.\
> Surrounded by an iron wall,\
> of iron is its roof.
>
> The ground is even made of iron,\
> it burns with fierce fire.\
> The heat forever radiates\
> a hundred leagues around.'

Once upon a time, King Yama thought, 'Those who do such bad deeds in the
world receive these many different punishments. Oh, I hope I may be
reborn as a human being! And that a Realized One---a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha---arises in the world! And that I may pay homage
to the Buddha! Then the Buddha can teach me Dhamma, so that I may
understand his teaching.'

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself.

> Those people who are negligent,\
> when warned by the gods' messengers:\
> a long time they sorrow,\
> when they go to that wretched place.
>
> But those good and peaceful people,\
> when warned by the god's messengers,\
> never neglect\
> the teaching of the noble ones.
>
> Seeing the peril in grasping,\
> the origin of birth and death,\
> the unattached are freed\
> with the ending of birth and death.
>
> Happy, they've come to a safe place,\
> quenched in this very life.\
> They've gone beyond all threats and perils,\
> and risen above all suffering."

</article>
<article id="an3.37">

#### [AN 3.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Four Great Kings (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catumahārājasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"On the eighth day of the fortnight, mendicants, the ministers and
counselors of the four great kings wander about the world, thinking:
'Hopefully most humans are paying due respect to their parents, ascetics
and brahmins, honoring the elders in their families, observing and
keeping vigil on the sabbath, and making merit.'

And on the fourteenth day of the fortnight, the sons of the four great
kings wander about the world, thinking: 'Hopefully most humans are
paying due respect to their parents ... and making merit.'

And on the fifteenth day sabbath, the four great kings themselves wander
about the world, thinking: 'Hopefully most humans are paying due respect
to their parents ... and making merit.'

If only a few humans are paying due respect to their parents ... and
making merit, the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three,
seated together in the Hall of Justice: 'Only a few humans are paying
due respect to their parents ... and making merit.' Then the gods of the
thirty-three are disappointed, thinking, 'The heavenly hosts will
dwindle, while the titan hosts will swell!'

But if many humans are paying due respect to their parents ... and
making merit, the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three,
seated together in the Hall of Justice: 'Many humans are paying due
respect to their parents ... and making merit.' Then the gods of the
thirty-three are pleased, thinking, 'The heavenly hosts will swell,
while the titan hosts will dwindle!'

Once upon a time, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the
thirty-three, recited this verse:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung;
poorly spoken, not well spoken. Why is that? Sakka, lord of gods, is not
free of greed, hate, and delusion.

But for a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---it is
appropriate to say:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath,\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

Why is that? Because that mendicant is free of greed, hate, and
delusion."

</article>
<article id="an3.38">

#### [AN 3.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Four Great Kings (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyacatumahārājasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of
the thirty-three, recited this verse:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung;
poorly spoken, not well spoken. Why is that? Because Sakka, lord of
gods, is not exempt from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is not exempt from
suffering, I say.

But for a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---it is
appropriate to say:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath,\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

Why is that? Because that mendicant is exempt from rebirth, old age, and
death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is
exempt from suffering, I say."

</article>
<article id="an3.39">

#### [AN 3.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Delicate Lifestyle ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukhumālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"My lifestyle was delicate, mendicants, most delicate, extremely
delicate.

In my father's home, lotus ponds were made just for me. In some, blue
water lilies blossomed, while in others, there were pink or white
lotuses, just for my benefit. I only used sandalwood from Kāsi, and my
turbans, jackets, sarongs, and upper robes also came from Kāsi. And a
white parasol was held over me night and day, with the thought: 'Don't
let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother him.'

I had three stilt longhouses---one for the winter, one for the summer,
and one for the rainy season. I stayed in a stilt longhouse without
coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where I was
entertained by musicians---none of them men.

While the bondservants, workers, and staff in other houses are given
rough gruel with pickles to eat, in my father's home they are given fine
rice with meat.

Amid such prosperity and such a delicate lifestyle, I thought: 'When an
unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to grow old, not being exempt
from old age---sees someone else who is old, they're horrified,
repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are
in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to grow old, it would
not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted,
when I see someone else who is old.' Reflecting like this, I entirely
gave up the vanity of youth.

'When an unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to get sick, not
being exempt from sickness---sees someone else who is sick, they're
horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they
themselves are in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to get
sick, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed,
and disgusted, when I see someone else who is sick.' Reflecting like
this, I entirely gave up the vanity of health.

'When an unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to die, not being
exempt from death---sees someone else who is dead, they're horrified,
repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are
in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to die, it would not
be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when
I see someone else who is dead.' Reflecting like this, I entirely gave
up the vanity of life.

There are these three vanities. What three? The vanity of youth, of
health, and of life.

Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, an unlearned ordinary person does
bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Intoxicated with the vanity of health ...

Intoxicated with the vanity of life, an unlearned ordinary person does
bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, health, or life, a mendicant
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life.

> For others, sickness is natural,\
> and so are old age and death.\
> Though this is how their nature is,\
> ordinary people feel disgusted.
>
> If I were to be disgusted\
> with creatures whose nature is such,\
> it would not be appropriate for me,\
> since my life is just the same.
>
> Living in such a way,\
> I understood the truth without attachments.\
> I mastered all vanities---\
> of health, of youth,
>
> and even of life---\
> seeing renunciation as sanctuary.\
> Zeal sprang up in me\
> as I looked to extinguishment.
>
> Now I'm unable\
> to indulge in sensual pleasures;\
> there's no turning back,\
> I'm committed to the spiritual life."

</article>
<article id="an3.40">

#### [AN 3.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Charge ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ādhipateyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are, mendicants, these three things to put in charge. What three?
Putting oneself, the world, or the teaching in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting oneself in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death;
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." But it would not be appropriate
for me to seek sensual pleasures like those I abandoned when I went
forth, or even worse.' Then they reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up
and unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body
shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in
samādhi.' Putting themselves in charge, they give up the unskillful and
develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the
blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is called putting oneself
in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting the world in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death,
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." And now, since I've now gone
forth, I might have sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. But the
population of the world is large, and there are ascetics and brahmins
who have psychic power---they're clairvoyant, and can read the minds of
others. They see far without being seen, even by those close; and they
understand the minds of others. They would know me:

"Look at this gentleman; he's gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness, but he's living mixed up with bad, unskillful
qualities." And there are deities, too, who have psychic power---they're
clairvoyant, and can read the minds of others. They see far without
being seen, even by those close; and they understand the minds of
others. They would know me:

"Look at this gentleman; he's gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness, but he's living mixed up with bad, unskillful
qualities."' Then they reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up and
unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body shall be
tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in samādhi.'
Putting the world in charge, they give up the unskillful and develop the
skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and
they keep themselves pure. This is called putting the world in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting the teaching in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death,
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." The teaching is well explained by
the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. I have spiritual companions who live knowing and seeing. Now
that I've gone forth in this well explained teaching and training, it
would not be appropriate for me to live lazy and heedless.' Then they
reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, mindfulness shall
be established and lucid, my body shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and
my mind shall be immersed in samādhi.' Putting the teaching in charge,
they give up the unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the
blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure.
This is called putting the teaching in charge.

These are the three things to put in charge.

> There's no privacy in the world,\
> for someone who does bad deeds.\
> You'll know for yourself,\
> whether you've lied or told the truth.
>
> When you witness your good self,\
> you despise it;\
> while you disguise\
> your bad self inside yourself.
>
> The gods and the Realized One see\
> the fool who lives unjustly in the world.\
> So with yourself in charge, live mindfully;\
> with the world in charge, `<j>`{=html}be alert and practice
> absorption; `</j>`{=html}\
> with the teaching in charge, `<j>`{=html}live in line with that
> teaching: `</j>`{=html}\
> a sage who tries for the truth doesn't deteriorate.
>
> Māra's conquered; the terminator's overcome:\
> one who strives reaches the end of rebirth.\
> Unaffected, intelligent, knowing the world---\
> that sage is determined by nothing at all."

</article>

[]{#an3-culavagga.xhtml}

### A Short Chapter {#an3-culavagga.xhtml_an3-culavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.41">

#### [AN 3.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Present ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammukhībhāvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when three things are present, a faithful gentleman creates
much merit. What three? When faith is present, when a gift to give is
present, and when those worthy of a religious donation are present. When
these three things are present, a faithful gentleman creates much
merit."

</article>
<article id="an3.42">

#### [AN 3.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Three Grounds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tiṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are three grounds, mendicants, by which a person with faith and
confidence can be known. What three? They like to see ethical people.
They like to hear the true teaching. And they live at home rid of the
stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go,
committed to charity, loving to give and to share. These are the three
grounds by which a person with faith and confidence can be known.

> They like to see ethical people;\
> they want to hear the true teaching;\
> they've driven out the stain of stinginess:\
> that's who's called a person of faith."

</article>
<article id="an3.43">

#### [AN 3.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Reasons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atthavasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, taking three reasons into consideration provides quite
enough motivation to teach Dhamma to another. What three? When the
teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. When the audience
understands the meaning and the teaching. When both the teacher and the
audience understand the meaning and the teaching.

Taking these three reasons into consideration provides quite enough
motivation to teach Dhamma to another."

</article>
<article id="an3.44">

#### [AN 3.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [When Conversation Flows ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kathāpavattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"In three situations, mendicants, conversation flows. What three? When
the teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. When the audience
understands the meaning and the teaching. When both the teacher and the
audience understand the meaning and the teaching. These are the three
situations in which conversation flows."

</article>
<article id="an3.45">

#### [AN 3.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Recommended by the Astute ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṇḍitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three things are recommended by astute true persons.
What three? Giving, going forth, and taking care of your mother and
father. These are the three things recommended by astute true persons.

> The virtuous recommend giving,\
> harmlessness, restraint, and self-control;\
> caring for mother and father,\
> and peaceful spiritual practitioners.
>
> These are the things recommended by the good,\
> which the astute should cultivate.\
> A noble one, having vision,\
> will enjoy a world of grace."

</article>
<article id="an3.46">

#### [AN 3.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethical ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlavantasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when ethical renunciates are supported by a town or
village, the people there create much merit in three ways. What three?
By way of body, speech, and mind. When ethical renunciates are supported
by a town or village, the people there create much merit in these three
ways."

</article>
<article id="an3.47">

#### [AN 3.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Characteristics of the Conditioned ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the conditioned has these three characteristics. What
three? Arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while
persisting is evident. These are the three characteristics of the
conditioned."

##### Characteristics of the Unconditioned {.subheading}

"The unconditioned has these three characteristics. What three? No
arising is evident, no vanishing is evident, and no change while
persisting is evident. These are the three characteristics of the
unconditioned."

</article>
<article id="an3.48">

#### [AN 3.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The King of Mountains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pabbatarājasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, great sal trees grow in three ways supported by the
Himalayas, the king of mountains. What three? The branches, leaves, and
foliage; the bark and shoots; and the softwood and heartwood. Great sal
trees grow in these three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of
mountains.

In the same way, a family grows in three ways supported by a family head
with faith. What three? Faith, ethics, and wisdom. A family grows in
these three ways supported by a family head with faith.

> Supported by the rocky mountain\
> in the wilds, the formidable forest,\
> the tree grows\
> to become lord of the forest.
>
> So too, when the family head\
> is ethical and faithful,\
> supported by them, they grow:\
> children, partners, and kin,\
> colleagues, relatives,\
> and those dependent for their livelihood.
>
> Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous,\
> the generosity and good deeds,\
> those who see clearly\
> do likewise.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> the path that goes to a good place,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

</article>
<article id="an3.49">

#### [AN 3.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Keen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ātappakaraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"In three situations, mendicants, you should be keen. What three? You
should be keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. You
should be keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And you should be
keen to endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, life-threatening. In these three situations, you should be
keen.

It's a mendicant who is keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from
arising. They're keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And they're
keen to endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, life-threatening. This is called a mendicant who is keen,
alert, and mindful so as to rightly make an end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an3.50">

#### [AN 3.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Master Thief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahācorasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a master thief with three factors breaks into houses,
plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway
robbery. What three?

A master thief relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals. And how does a master thief rely on uneven ground? It's
when a master thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged
mountains. That's how a master thief relies on uneven ground.

And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? It's when a master
thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a ridge, or a large forest
grove. That's how a master thief relies on thick cover.

And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
master thief relies on rulers or their ministers. They think: 'If anyone
accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will speak in my
defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens. That's how a
master thief relies on powerful individuals.

A master thief with these three factors breaks into houses, plunders
wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery.

In the same way, when a bad mendicant has three factors, they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What three?

A bad mendicant relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on uneven ground? It's when a bad
mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's
how a bad mendicant relies on uneven ground.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? It's when a bad
mendicant has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist view. That's how
a bad mendicant relies on thick cover.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
bad mendicant relies on rulers or their ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will
speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals.

When a bad mendicant has these three qualities, they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness."

</article>

[]{#an3-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an3-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an3-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Brahmins {#an3-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an3-brahmanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.51">

#### [AN 3.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Two Brahmins (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamadvebrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then two old brahmins---elderly and senior, who were advanced in years
and had reached the final stage of life, a hundred and twenty years
old---went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side,
and said to the Buddha:

"We brahmins, Mister Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we're advanced
in years and have reached the final stage of life; we're a hundred and
twenty years old. And we haven't done what is good and skillful, nor
have we made a shelter from fear. Advise us, Mister Gotama, instruct us!
It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness."

"Indeed, brahmins, you're old, elderly and senior. And you haven't done
what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. This
world is led on by old age, sickness, and death. But restraint here by
way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, protection, island,
refuge, and haven for the departed.

> This life, so very short, is led onward.\
> There's no shelter for someone `<j>`{=html}who's been led on by old
> age. `</j>`{=html}\
> Seeing this peril in death,\
> you should do good deeds that bring happiness.
>
> The restraint practiced here---\
> of body, speech, and mind---\
> leads the departed to happiness,\
> as the good deeds done while living."

</article>
<article id="an3.52">

#### [AN 3.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Two Brahmins (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyadvebrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then two old brahmins---elderly and senior, who were advanced in years
and had reached the final stage of life, being a hundred and twenty
years old---went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to the Buddha:

"We brahmins, Mister Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we're advanced
in years and have reached the final stage of life; we're a hundred and
twenty years old. And we haven't done what is good and skillful, nor
have we made a shelter from fear. Advise us, Mister Gotama, instruct us!
It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness."

"Indeed, brahmins, you're old, elderly and senior. And you haven't done
what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. This
world is burning with old age, sickness, and death. But restraint here
by way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, protection, island,
refuge, and haven for the departed.

> When your house is on fire,\
> you rescue the pot\
> that's useful,\
> not the one that's burnt.
>
> And as the world is on fire\
> with old age and death,\
> you should rescue by giving,\
> for what's given is rescued.
>
> The restraint practiced here---\
> of body, speech, and mind---\
> leads the departed to happiness,\
> as the good deeds done while living."

</article>
<article id="an3.53">

#### [AN 3.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Certain Brahmin ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.
Seated to one side he said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and
sadness. When greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental
pain and sadness. This is how the teaching is apparent in the present
life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that
sensible people can know it for themselves.

A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
hate has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.54">

#### [AN 3.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Wanderer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paribbājakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a brahmin wanderer went up to the Buddha ... Seated to one side he
said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.

A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
greed has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind.

A greedy person doesn't truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. When greed has been given up, they
truly understand what's for their own good, the good of another, or the
good of both. This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A hateful person ... A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to
hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain
and sadness. When delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental
pain and sadness.

A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
delusion has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind.

A deluded person doesn't truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. When delusion has been given up,
they truly understand what's for their own good, the good of another, or
the good of both. This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an3.55">

#### [AN 3.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Quenched ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbutasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they say that 'extinguishment is apparent in the present
life'. In what way is extinguishment apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life.

A hateful person ...

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life.

When you experience the ending of greed, hate, and delusion without
anything left over, that's how extinguishment is apparent in the present
life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that
sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an3.56">

#### [AN 3.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Falling Apart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Palokasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a well-to-do Brahmin went up to the Buddha, and seated to one side
he said to him:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly
and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'In the old days this world was
so full of people you'd think they were squashed together. The villages,
towns and capital cities were no more than a chicken's flight apart.'
What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why these days human numbers
have dwindled, a decline in population is evident, and whole villages,
towns, cities, and countries have disappeared?"

"These days, brahmin, humans just love illicit desire. They're overcome
by immoral greed, and mired in wrong custom. Taking up sharp knives,
they murder each other. And so many people perish. This is the cause,
this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled.

Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire ... the
heavens don't provide enough rain, so there's famine, a bad harvest,
with blighted crops that turn to straw. And so many people perish. This
is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have
dwindled.

Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire ...
native spirits let vicious monsters loose. And so many people perish.
This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have
dwindled."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an3.57">

#### [AN 3.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vacchagotta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vacchagottasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"I have heard, Mister Gotama, that the ascetic Gotama says this: 'Gifts
should only be given to me, not to others. Gifts should only be given to
my disciples, not to the disciples of others. Only what is given to me
is very fruitful, not what is given to others. Only what is given to my
disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of
others.'

I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do
not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with
the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and
criticism? For we don't want to misrepresent Mister Gotama."

"Vaccha, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false and untrue.

Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a barrier
for three people. What three? The giver is obstructed from making merit.
The receiver is obstructed from getting what is offered. And they've
already broken and damaged themselves. Anyone who prevents another from
giving makes an obstacle and a barrier for these three people.

Vaccha, this is what I say: 'You even make merit by tipping out
dish-washing water in a cesspool or a sump with living creatures in it,
thinking, "May any creatures here be nourished!"' How much more then for
human beings!

However, I also say that a gift to an ethical person is more fruitful
than one to an unethical person. They've given up five factors, and
possess five factors.

What are the five factors they've given up? Sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are
the five factors they've given up.

What are the five factors they possess? The entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of
freedom. These are the five factors they possess.

I say that a gift to anyone who has given up these five factors and
possesses these five factors is very fruitful.

> Cows may be black or white,\
> red or tawny,\
> mottled or uniform,\
> or pigeon-colored.
>
> But when one is born among them,\
> the bull that's tamed---\
> a behemoth, powerful,\
> well-paced in pulling forward---\
> they yoke the load just to him,\
> regardless of his color.
>
> So it is for humans,\
> wherever they may be born---\
> among aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,\
> menials, or corpse-workers and scavengers---
>
> one is born among them,\
> tamed, true to their vows.\
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious,
>
> they've given up birth and death.\
> Complete in the spiritual journey,\
> with burden put down, detached,\
> they've completed the task `<j>`{=html}and are free of defilements.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Gone beyond all things,\
> they're quenched by not grasping.\
> In that flawless field,\
> a religious donation is abundant.
>
> Fools who don't understand---\
> stupid, unlearned---\
> give their gifts to those outside,\
> and don't attend the peaceful ones.
>
> But those who do attend the peaceful ones---\
> wise, esteemed as sages---\
> and whose faith in the Holy One\
> has roots planted deep,
>
> they go to the realm of the gods,\
> or are born here in a good family.\
> Gradually those astute ones\
> reach extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an3.58">

#### [AN 3.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Tikaṇṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tikaṇṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Tikaṇṇa the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. Seated to one side, in front of the Buddha, Tikaṇṇa praised
the brahmins who were proficient in the three Vedas, "Such are the
brahmins, masters of the three Vedic knowledges! Thus are the brahmins,
masters of the three Vedic knowledges!"

"But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of
the three Vedic knowledges?"

"Mister Gotama, it's when a brahmin is well born on both his mother's
and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and
remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with
their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great man. That's how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of
the three Vedic knowledges."

"Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is
quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Tikaṇṇa replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details. This is the first
knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has
arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as happens for a
meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away
and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good
place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn
according to their deeds. This is the second knowledge that they attain.
Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed
and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen,
and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they know
they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is the third knowledge that they attain. Ignorance
is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed, and light
has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and
resolute.

> For someone whose ethical conduct doesn't waver,\
> who is alert, practicing absorption;\
> whose mind is mastered,\
> unified, serene.
>
> That wise one dispels the darkness,\
> master of the three knowledges, conqueror of death.\
> For the welfare of gods and humans,\
> he has given up everything, they say.
>
> Accomplished in the three knowledges,\
> living without confusion,\
> bearing the final body,\
> they revere the awakened Gotama.
>
> One who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the ending of rebirth,\
> a sage of perfect insight---
>
> it's because of these three knowledges\
> that a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges.\
> That's who I call a three-knowledge master,\
> and not the other `<j>`{=html}who repeats what they are told.
> `</j>`{=html}

This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins
is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training
of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges
according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of
the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.59">

#### [AN 3.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Jānussoṇi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jāṇussoṇisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, whoever has a sacrifice, an offering of food for
ancestors, a dish of milk-rice prepared for an auspicious ceremony, or a
gift to give, should give it to the brahmins who have mastered the three
Vedic knowledges."

"But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient
in the three Vedic knowledges?"

"Mister Gotama, it's when a brahmin is well born on both his mother's
and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and
remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with
their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great man. That's how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient
in the three Vedic knowledges."

"Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is
quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures
... enters and remains in the fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives. They
recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details. This is
the first knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is destroyed and
knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as
happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the
human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds. This is the second knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is
destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has
arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. They truly
understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality,
desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed, they know
they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is the third knowledge that they attain. Ignorance
is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed, and light
has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and
resolute.

> One who is perfect in precepts and observances,\
> resolute and serene,\
> whose mind is mastered,\
> unified, serene;
>
> who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the end of rebirth,\
> such a sage has perfect insight.
>
> Because of these three knowledges\
> a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges.\
> That's who I call a three-knowledge master,\
> and not the other `<j>`{=html}who repeats what they are told.
> `</j>`{=html}

This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"Mister Gotama, the master of three knowledges according to the brahmins
is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training
of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges
according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of
the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.60">

#### [AN 3.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, we who are called brahmins make sacrifices and encourage
others to make sacrifices. Now, Mister Gotama, both of these
people---the one who sacrifices and the one who encourages others to
sacrifice---are doing good for many people on account of that sacrifice.
But, Mister Gotama, when someone has gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness, they tame, calm, and extinguish themselves alone. That
being so, they are doing good for just one person on account of that
going forth."

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? A Realized One arises in
the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge
and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish
to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He says, 'Come,
this is the path, this is the practice. Practicing like this, I realized
the supreme culmination of the spiritual life with my own insight, and I
make it known. Please, all of you, practice like this, and you too will
realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual life, and will live
having realized it with your own insight.' So the teacher teaches
Dhamma, and others practice accordingly, in their hundreds and
thousands, and hundreds of thousands.

What do you think, brahmin? This being so, are they doing good for just
one person or for many people on account of going forth?"

"This being so, Mister Gotama, they are doing good for many people on
account of going forth."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, "Brahmin, which
of these two practices do you believe has fewer requirements and
undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, "Those such as misters Gotama and Ānanda are
honored and praised by me!"

For a second time, Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, "Brahmin, I didn't ask you
who you honor and praise. I asked you which of these two practices do
you believe has fewer requirements and undertakings, yet is more
fruitful and beneficial?"

For a second time Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, "Those such as misters
Gotama and Ānanda are honored and praised by me!"

For a third time, Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, "Brahmin, I didn't ask you
who you honor and praise. I asked you which of these two practices do
you believe has fewer requirements and undertakings, yet is more
fruitful and beneficial?"

For a third time Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, "Those such as misters Gotama
and Ānanda are honored and praised by me!"

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "Though Ānanda asked him a sensible
question three times, Saṅgārava falters without answering. Why don't I
give him a way out?"

So the Buddha said to Saṅgārava, "Brahmin, what came up in the
conversation among the king's retinue today, sitting together in the
royal compound?"

"Mister Gotama, this came up: 'Formerly, it seems, there were fewer
mendicants, but more of them displayed superhuman demonstrations of
psychic power; while these days, there are more mendicants, but fewer
display superhuman demonstrations of psychic power.' This is what came
up in the conversation among the king's retinue today, while sitting
together in the royal compound."

"Brahmin, there are three kinds of demonstration. What three? A
demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a
demonstration of instruction.

And what is the demonstration of psychic power? It's when someone wields
the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one
again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a
rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the
earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying
cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the
hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as
far as the Brahmā realm. This is called the demonstration of psychic
power.

And what is the demonstration of revealing? In one case, someone reveals
by means of a sign: 'This is what you're thinking, such is your thought,
and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this many
times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise.

In another case, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or
non-humans or deities: 'This is what you're thinking, such is your
thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this
many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise.

In another case, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought
spreading as someone thinks and considers: 'This is what you're
thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And
even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not
otherwise.

In another case, someone comprehends the mind of a person who has
attained the immersion that's free of placing the mind and keeping it
connected. They understand: 'Judging by the way this person's intentions
are directed, immediately after this mind state, they'll think this
thought.' And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly
so, not otherwise. This is called the demonstration of revealing.

And what is a demonstration of instruction? It's when someone instructs
others like this: 'Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like
this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.' This
is called a demonstration of instruction.

These are the three kinds of demonstration. Of these three kinds of
demonstration, which do you consider to be the finest?"

"Regarding this, Mister Gotama, a demonstration of psychic power is
experienced only by the one who performs it, occurring only to them.
This seems to me like a magic trick.

And the demonstration where someone reveals something by means of a
sign, or after hearing it from humans, non-humans, or deities, or by
hearing the sound of thought spreading as someone thinks and considers,
or by comprehending the mind of another person, is also experienced only
by the one who performs it, occurring only to them. This also seems to
me like a magic trick.

But as to the demonstration where someone instructs others: 'Think like
this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up
this, and live having achieved that.' I prefer this demonstration,
Mister Gotama. It's the finest of the three kinds of demonstration.

It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how well this was said by
Mister Gotama. We regard Mister Gotama as someone who possesses these
three kinds of demonstration. For Mister Gotama wields the many kinds of
psychic power ... controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. And
Mister Gotama comprehends the mind of another person who has attained
the immersion that is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected.
He understands: 'Judging by the way this person's intentions are
directed, immediately after this mind state they'll think this thought.'
And Mister Gotama instructs others like this: 'Think like this, not like
that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live
having achieved that.'"

"Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. Nevertheless, I
will answer you. For I do wield the many kinds of psychic power ...
controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm. And I do comprehend the
mind of another person who has attained the immersion that is free of
placing the mind and keeping it connected. I understand: 'Judging by the
way this person's intentions are directed, immediately after this mind
state they'll think this thought.' And I do instruct others like this:
'Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like
that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.'"

"But Mister Gotama, is there even one other mendicant who possesses
these three kinds of demonstration, apart from Mister Gotama?"

"There's not just one hundred mendicants, brahmin, who possess these
three kinds of demonstration, nor two, three, four, or five hundred, but
many more than that."

"But where are these mendicants now staying?"

"Right here, brahmin, in this Saṅgha of mendicants."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#an3-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an3-mahavagga.xhtml_an3-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.61">

#### [AN 3.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sectarian Tenets ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Titthāyatanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and
grilled by the astute---when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction. What three?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of past deeds.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of God Almighty's creation.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---has no cause or reason.'

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of past deeds, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because
of past deeds.'

Those who believe that past deeds are the most important thing have no
enthusiasm or effort, no idea that there are things that should and
should not be done. Since they don't actually find that there are things
that should and should not be done, they're unmindful and careless, and
can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my first legitimate refutation
of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of God Almighty's
creation, and I said to them: 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that
case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious,
or have wrong view, all because of God Almighty's creation.'

Those who believe that God Almighty's creative power is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
second legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced has no cause or reason, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all without
cause or reason.'

Those who believe that the absence of cause or reason is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
third legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

These are the three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and grilled
by the astute---which, when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction.

But the Dhamma that I've taught is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond
reproach, and not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins. What is the
Dhamma that I've taught?

'These are the six elements': this is the Dhamma I've taught ...

'These are the six fields of contact': this is the Dhamma I've taught
...

'These are the eighteen mental preoccupations': this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...

'These are the four noble truths': this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six elements: the elements of earth, water, fire, air,
space, and consciousness.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six fields of contact: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind contact.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' This is what I said, but why did I say it?

Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that's a
basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

Hearing a sound with the ear ...

Smelling an odor with the nose ...

Tasting a flavor with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ...

Becoming conscious of an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an
idea that's a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

Supported by the six elements, an embryo is conceived. When it is
conceived, there are name and form. Name and form are conditions for the
six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. It's for one who feels that I
declare: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ...
'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are suffering; association with the disliked is suffering;
separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is
suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. This is
called the noble truth of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? Ignorance is a
condition for choices. Choices are a condition for consciousness.
Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are
conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions
for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition
for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this
entire mass of suffering originates. This is called the noble truth of
the origin of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? When
ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease.
When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases,
name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields
cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact
ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When
craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.
This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the noble
truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it."

</article>
<article id="an3.62">

#### [AN 3.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perils ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and
a child can't find their mother. This is the first peril that tears
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find
their mother. This is the second peril that tears mothers and children
apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find their
mother. This is the third peril that tears mothers and children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
tear mothers and children apart.

Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
don't tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her
child, and a child can find their mother. This is the first peril that
doesn't tear mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child
can find their mother. This is the second peril that doesn't tear
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find
their mother. This is the third peril that doesn't tear mothers and
children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
don't tear mothers and children apart.

There are three perils that tear mothers and children apart. What three?

The perils of old age, sickness, and death. When a child is growing old,
a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me grow old, may my child not grow
old!' When a mother is growing old, a child doesn't get their wish: 'Let
me grow old, may my mother not grow old!'

When a child is sick, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me be sick,
may my child not be sick!' When a mother is sick, a child doesn't get
their wish: 'Let me be sick, may my mother not be sick!'

When a child is dying, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me die, may
my child not die!' When a mother is dying, a child doesn't get their
wish: 'Let me die, may my mother not die!' These are the three perils
that tear mothers and children apart.

There is a path and a practice that leads to giving up and going beyond
the three perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the
three perils that do tear mothers and children apart. What is that path
and practice? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice that leads to giving up and going beyond the three
perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the three perils
that do tear mothers and children apart."

</article>
<article id="an3.63">

#### [AN 3.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Venāgapura ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Venāgapurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village
of the Kosalan brahmins named Venāgapura. The brahmins and householders
of Venāgapura heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Venāgapura. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras
and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Venāgapura went up to the Buddha.
Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings
and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the
Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Then
the brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how your faculties are so
very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. It's
like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, or a palm fruit freshly
plucked from the stalk, or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned
by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug
where it shines and glows and radiates. In the same way, your faculties
are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright.

Surely Mister Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty,
various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: sofas, couches,
woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers,
quilted, embroidered with animals, double-or single-fringed---and silk
covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woven carpets, rugs
for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope hide rugs, and spreads of
fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends."

"Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding are hard for
renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they're not allowed.

There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. What three? The
heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and
the noble high and luxurious bed. These are the three high and luxurious
beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third
absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the giving up of
pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. When I'm practicing like this, if
I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. When I'm practicing like
this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. When I'm
practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly.
When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is
heavenly. This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

But what, Mister Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction,
and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity
and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a
heart full of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart
full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third,
and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I
meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. When I'm practicing like this, if I walk, at that
time my walking is divine. ... my standing is divine. ... my sitting is
divine. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my
lying is divine. This is the divine high and luxurious bed that I get
these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a divine high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the noble high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
his presence. I know this: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut
them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so
they're unable to arise in the future.' When I'm practicing like this,
if I walk, at that time my walking is noble. ... my standing is noble.
... my sitting is noble. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down,
at that time my lying is noble. This is the noble high and luxurious bed
that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a noble high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us as lay
followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.64">

#### [AN 3.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sarabha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sarabhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time a wanderer called Sarabha had recently left this
teaching and training. He was telling a crowd in Rājagaha, "I learned
the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I left their
teaching and training."

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Rājagaha for alms. They heard what Sarabha was
saying.

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "The wanderer
called Sarabha has recently left this teaching and training. He was
telling a crowd in Rājagaha: 'I learned the teaching of the ascetics who
follow the Sakyan, then I left their teaching and training.' Sir, please
go to the wanderers' monastery on the banks of the Sappinī river to see
Sarabha the wanderer out of sympathy." The Buddha consented with
silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the wanderers' monastery on the banks of the Sappinī river to visit
Sarabha the wanderer. He sat on the seat spread out, and said to the
wanderer Sarabha, "Is it really true, Sarabha, that you've been saying:
'I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I
left their teaching and training.'" When he said this, Sarabha kept
silent.

For a second time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Tell me, Sarabha, what
exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the
Sakyan? If you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you
have learned it fully, I'll agree." For a second time, Sarabha kept
silent.

For a third time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Sarabha, the teachings of
the ascetics who follow the Sakyan are clear to me. What exactly have
you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? If
you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you have learned
it fully, I'll agree." For a third time, Sarabha kept silent.

Then those wanderers said to Sarabha, "The ascetic Gotama has offered to
tell you anything you ask for. Speak, reverend Sarabha, what exactly
have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan?
If you've not learned it fully, he'll fill you in. But if you have
learned it fully, he'll agree." When this was said, Sarabha sat silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to the wanderers:

"Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to be a fully awakened
Buddha, but you don't understand these things.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to have ended all
defilements, but you still have these defilements.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'Your teaching does not lead someone
who practices it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which
it is taught.' Then I'd carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that
point. When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of
these three categories. They'd dodge the issue, distracting the
discussion with irrelevant points. They'd display annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. Or they'd sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping,
downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha."

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar three times in the
wanderers' monastery on the bank of the Sappinī river, rose into the air
and flew away.

Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers beset Sarabha on all sides
with sneering and jeering. "Reverend Sarabha, you're just like an old
jackal in the formidable wilderness who thinks, 'I'll roar a lion's
roar!' but they still only manage to squeal and yelp like a jackal. In
the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll roar a
lion's roar!' but you only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal.

You're just like a golden oriole who thinks, 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!'
but they still only manage to cry like a golden oriole. In the same way,
when the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!'
but you still only managed to cry like a golden oriole.

You're just like a bull that thinks to bellow only when the cowstall is
empty. In the same way, you only thought to bellow when the ascetic
Gotama wasn't here." That's how those wanderers beset Sarabha on all
sides with sneering and jeering.

</article>
<article id="an3.65">

#### [AN 3.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Kālāmas of Kesamutta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kesamuttisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a town of the Kālāmas named Kesamutta. The Kālāmas of
Kesamutta heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Kesamutta. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha ...' It's good to see
such perfected ones."

Then the Kālāmas went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side,
some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held
up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and
clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side the Kālāmas said to the
Buddha:

"There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who come to Kesamutta. They
explain and promote only their own doctrine, while they attack,
badmouth, disparage, and smear the doctrines of others. Then some other
ascetics and brahmins come to Kesamutta. They too explain and promote
only their own doctrine, while they attack, badmouth, disparage, and
smear the doctrines of others. So, sir, we're doubting and uncertain: 'I
wonder who of these respected ascetics and brahmins speaks the truth,
and who speaks falsehood?'"

"It is enough, Kālāmas, for you to be doubting and uncertain. Doubt has
come up in you about an uncertain matter.

Please, Kālāmas, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by lineage,
don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't rely on
logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of thought,
don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't go by the
appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our respected
teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, Kālāmas? Does greed come up in a person for their
welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A greedy individual, overcome by greed, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Kālāmas? Does hate come up in a person for their
welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A hateful individual, overcome by hate, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Kālāmas? Does delusion come up in a person for their
welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A deluded individual, overcome by delusion, kills living creatures,
steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is
that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Kālāmas, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, Kālāmas, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral transmission, don't
go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority,
don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train
of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation,
don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think "The ascetic
is our respected teacher." But when you know for yourselves: "These
things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering", then you
should give them up.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

Please, Kālāmas, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by lineage,
don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't rely on
logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of thought,
don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't go by the
appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our respected
teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are skillful,
blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they
lead to welfare and happiness', then you should acquire them and keep
them.

What do you think, Kālāmas? Does contentment come up in a person for
their welfare or harm?"

"Welfare, sir."

"An individual who is content, not overcome by greed, doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do
the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Kālāmas? Does love come up in a person for their
welfare or harm? ... Does understanding come up in a person for their
welfare or harm? ... Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Kālāmas, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, Kālāmas, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral transmission, don't
go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority,
don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train
of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation,
don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think "The ascetic
is our respected teacher." But when you know for yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of rejoicing to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
uncorrupted and purified, they've won four consolations in the present
life. 'If it turns out there is another world, and good and bad deeds
have a result, then---when the body breaks up, after death---I'll be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' This is the first consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out there is no other world, and good and bad deeds don't
have a result, then in the present life I'll keep myself free of enmity
and ill will, untroubled and happy.' This is the second consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out that bad things happen to people who do bad things,
then since I have no bad intentions, and since I'm not doing anything
bad, how can suffering touch me?' This is the third consolation they've
won.

'If it turns out that bad things don't happen to people who do bad
things, then I still see myself pure on both sides.' This is the fourth
consolation they've won.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
undefiled and purified, they've won these four consolations in the
present life."

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! When that noble
disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will, undefiled and
purified, they've won these four consolations in the present life. ...

Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... We go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the
Buddha remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.66">

#### [AN 3.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sāḷha and His Friend ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāḷhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was staying
near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery. Then Sāḷha, Migāra's grandson, and Rohaṇa, Pekhuṇiya's
grandson went up to Venerable Nandaka, bowed, and sat down to one side.
Then Venerable Nandaka said to Sāḷha:

"Please, Sāḷha and friend, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, Sāḷha? Is greed real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Covetousness' is what I mean by this. A person who is greedy and
covetous kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sāḷha? Is hate real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Malice' is what I mean by this. A hateful and malicious person kills
living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others
to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sāḷha? Is delusion real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Ignorance' is what I mean by this. A person who is deluded and
ignorant kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sāḷha, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, Sāḷha and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, Sāḷha and friend, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake
them, they lead to welfare and happiness', then you should acquire them
and keep them.

What do you think? Is contentment real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Satisfaction' is what I mean by this. A person who is content and
satisfied doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or
encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and
happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

What do you think? Is love real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Kindness' is what I mean by this. A loving and kind-hearted person
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sāḷha? Is understanding real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Knowledge' is what I mean by this. A person who understands and knows
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sāḷha, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, Sāḷha and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love ...
compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will.

They understand: 'There is this, there is what is worse than this, there
is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of
perception.' Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When
they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

They understand: 'Formerly there was greed, which was unskillful. Now
there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was hate, which was
unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was
delusion, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful.'
So they live without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

</article>
<article id="an3.67">

#### [AN 3.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Topics of Discussion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kathāvatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are, mendicants, these three topics of discussion. What three?
You might discuss the past: 'That is how it was in the past.' You might
discuss the future: 'That is how it will be in the future.' Or you might
discuss the present: 'This is how it is at present.'

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if it needs to be answered categorically and they don't answer
it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer without
analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer without
a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they don't set it
aside, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a
person is asked a question, if it needs to be answered categorically and
they answer it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer
after analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer
with a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they set it
aside, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they're not consistent about what their position is and
what it isn't; about what they propose; about speaking from what they
know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that person is not
competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a question, if
they are consistent about what their position is and what it isn't;
about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about
the appropriate procedure, then that person is competent to hold a
discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they don't dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes,
then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is
asked a question, if they don't intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on
trivial mistakes, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person has what's required by seeing how
they take part in a discussion. If they actively listen they have what's
required; if they don't actively listen they don't have what's required.
Someone who has what's required directly knows one thing, completely
understands one thing, gives up one thing, and realizes one thing---and
then they experience complete freedom. This is the purpose of
discussion, consultation, the requirements, and listening well, that is,
the liberation of the mind by not grasping.

> Those who converse with hostility,\
> too sure of themselves, arrogant,\
> ignoble, attacking virtues,\
> they look for flaws in each other.
>
> They rejoice together when their opponent\
> speaks poorly and makes a mistake,\
> becoming confused and defeated---\
> but the noble ones don't discuss like this.
>
> If an astute person wants to hold a discussion\
> connected with the teaching and its meaning---\
> the kind of discussion that noble ones hold---\
> then that wise one should start the discussion,
>
> knowing when the time is right,\
> neither hostile nor arrogant.\
> Not over-excited,\
> contemptuous, or aggressive,
>
> or with a mind full of jealousy,\
> they'd speak from what they rightly know.\
> They agree with what was well spoken,\
> without criticizing what was poorly said.
>
> They'd not persist in finding faults,\
> nor seize on trivial mistakes,\
> neither intimidating nor crushing the other,\
> nor would they speak suggestively.
>
> Good people consult\
> for the sake of knowledge and clarity.\
> That's how the noble ones consult,\
> this is a noble consultation.\
> Knowing this, an intelligent person\
> would consult without arrogance."

</article>
<article id="an3.68">

#### [AN 3.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Followers of Other Religions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aññatitthiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' How would you answer
them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' You should answer
them: 'Greed, reverends, is mildly blameworthy, but slow to fade away.
Hate is very blameworthy, but quick to fade away. Delusion is very
blameworthy, and slow to fade away.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The
beautiful feature of things. When you apply the mind irrationally to the
beautiful feature of things, greed arises, and once arisen it increases
and grows. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed arises, and
once arisen it increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate arises,
and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The feature of
harshness. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of
harshness, hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is
the cause, this is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say:
'Irrational application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally,
delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is the
cause, this is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'The ugly feature of things. When you apply the mind rationally on the
ugly feature of things, greed doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say: 'The
heart's release by love.' When you apply the mind rationally on the
heart's release by love, hate doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'Rational application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally,
delusion doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up. This is
the cause, this is the reason why delusion doesn't arise, or if it's
already arisen it's given up.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.69">

#### [AN 3.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unskillful Roots ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalamūlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three unskillful roots. What three? Greed,
hate, and delusion.

Greed is a root of the unskillful. When a greedy person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a greedy
person, overcome by greed, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by greed.

Hate is a root of the unskillful. When a hateful person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a hateful
person, overcome by hate, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by hate.

Delusion is a root of the unskillful. When a deluded person chooses to
act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a
deluded person, overcome by delusion, causes another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced
in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by delusion. Such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they're scornful and admit nothing. When
someone makes a baseless criticism, they make no effort to explain,
'This is why that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born of greed,
hate, and delusion---suffers in the present life, with anguish,
distress, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect to be reborn in a bad place.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. It would fall to ruin and disaster. In the
same way, such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born
of greed, hate, and delusion---suffers in the present life, with
anguish, distress, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death,
they can expect to be reborn in a bad place.

These are the three unskillful roots.

There are these three skillful roots. What three? Contentment, love, and
understanding.

Contentment is a root of the skillful. When a contented person chooses
to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a
contented person, not overcome by greed, doesn't cause another to suffer
under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by contentment.

Love is a root of the skillful. When a loving person chooses to act by
way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a loving
person, not overcome by hate, doesn't cause another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by love.

Understanding is a root of the skillful. When an understanding person
chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful.
When an understanding person, not overcome by delusion, doesn't cause
another to suffer under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment
or confiscation or condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful,
I want power', that too is skillful. And so these many skillful things
are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by
understanding. Such a person is said to have speech that's well-timed,
true, meaningful, in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person doesn't cause another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they admit it and aren't scornful. When someone
makes a baseless criticism, they make an effort to explain, 'This is why
that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a person is
said to have speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful, in line with
the teaching and training.

For such a person, bad unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and
delusion are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated,
and unable to arise in the future. In the present life they're happy,
free of anguish, distress, and fever, and they're also extinguished in
the present life.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. Then along comes a person with a spade and
basket. They'd cut the creeper out by the roots, dig them up, and pull
them out, down to the fibers and stems. Then they'd split the creeper
apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They'd dry the
splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to
ashes. Then they'd sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream. So those camel's foot creepers would be cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, and obliterated, unable to
arise in the future. In the same way, for such a person, bad unskillful
qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion are cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
In the present life they're happy, free of anguish, distress, and fever,
and they're also extinguished in the present life.

These are the three skillful roots."

</article>
<article id="an3.70">

#### [AN 3.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery.

Then Visākhā, Migāra's mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to her, "So, Visākhā, where are you
coming from in the middle of the day?"

"Today, sir, I'm observing the sabbath."

"There are, Visākhā, these three sabbaths. What three? The sabbath of
the cowherds, the sabbath of the Jains, and the sabbath of the noble
ones.

And what is the sabbath of the cowherds? It's just like a cowherd who,
in the late afternoon, takes the cows back to their owners. They
reflect: 'Today the cows grazed in this spot and that, and they drank in
this spot and that. Tomorrow the cows will graze in this spot and that,
and drink in this spot and that.' In the same way, someone keeping the
sabbath reflects: 'Today I ate this and that, and had a meal of this and
that. Tomorrow I'll eat this and that, and have a meal of this and
that.' And so they spend their day with a mind full of covetousness.
That's the sabbath of the cowherds. When the cowherd's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the Jains? There's a kind of ascetic
belonging to a group called the Jains. They encourage their disciples:
'Please, good people, don't hurt any living creatures more than a
hundred leagues away to the east. Don't hurt any living creatures more
than a hundred leagues away to the west. Don't hurt any living creatures
more than a hundred leagues away to the north. Don't hurt any living
creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the south.' So they
encourage kindness and sympathy for some creatures and not others. On
the sabbath, they encourage their disciples: 'Please, good people, take
off all your clothes and say: "I don't belong to anyone anywhere! And
nothing belongs to me anywhere!"' But their mother and father still
know, 'This is our child.' And they know, 'This is my mother and
father.' Partner and child still know, 'This is our supporter.' And they
know, 'This is my partner and child.' Bondservants, workers, and staff
still know: 'This is our master.' And they know, 'These are my
bondservants, workers, and staff.' So, at a time when they should be
encouraged to speak the truth, the Jains encourage them to lie. This, I
say, is lying. When the night has passed they use their possessions once
more, though they've not been given back to them. This, I say, is
stealing. That's the sabbath of the Jains. When the Jain's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the noble ones? A corrupt mind is cleaned by
applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort?
It's when a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect
the Realized One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty head by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty head cleaned by applying effort? With cleansing
paste, clay, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. In the
same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect the Realized
One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are
given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of
Brahmā, living together with Brahmā. And because they think of Brahmā
their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given
up.' That's how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' As they recollect
the teaching, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty body by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty body cleaned by applying effort? With cleanser and
powder, water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty body is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the
Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.' As they recollect the teaching, their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A
noble disciple who observes the sabbath of Dhamma, living together with
Dhamma. And because they think of the Dhamma their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.' As they
recollect the Saṅgha, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty cloth by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty cloth cleaned by applying effort? With salt, lye, cow
dung, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty cloth is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is
practicing the way that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration
with joined palms. It is the supreme field of merit for the world.' As
they recollect the Saṅgha, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and
mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who
observes the sabbath of the Saṅgha, living together with the Saṅgha. And
because they think of the Saṅgha their mind becomes clear, joy arises,
and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind is
cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects their
own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. As they recollect their ethical conduct, their
mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.
It's just like cleaning a dirty mirror by applying effort.

And how is a dirty mirror cleaned by applying effort? With oil, ash, a
rolled-up cloth, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty mirror is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. As they recollect their
ethical conduct, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes
the sabbath of ethical conduct, living together with ethics. And because
they think of their ethical conduct their mind becomes clear, joy
arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind
is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
deities: 'There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the
thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to
imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by others, the gods of
Brahmā's host, and gods even higher than these. When those deities
passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.' As they recollect the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleansing corrupt native gold
by applying effort.

And how is corrupt native gold cleansed by applying effort? With a
furnace, flux, a blowpipe, and tongs, and by applying the appropriate
effort. That's how corrupt native gold is cleansed by applying effort.
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the gods of the four great
kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods,
the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by
others, the gods of Brahmā's host, and gods even higher than these. When
those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there because of
their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the
same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.' As they
recollect the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both
themselves and those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and
mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who
observes the sabbath of the deities, living together with the deities.
And because they think of the deities their mind becomes clear, joy
arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind
is cleaned by applying effort.

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the perfected
ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword.
They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living
beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living
creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous and
kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take
only what's given, and expect only what's given. They keep themselves
clean by not thieving. I, too, for this day and night will give up
stealing. I'll take only what's given, and expect only what's given.
I'll keep myself clean by not thieving. I will observe the sabbath by
doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I, too, for this
day and night will give up unchastity. I will be celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I will observe the sabbath by doing as
the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the
truth and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't
trick the world with their words. I, too, for this day and night will
give up lying. I'll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I'll be
honest and trustworthy, and won't trick the world with my words. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up alcoholic drinks that
cause negligence. I, too, for this day and night will give up alcoholic
drinks that cause negligence. I will observe the sabbath by doing as the
perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. I, too,
for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night and food at the wrong time. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones avoid seeing shows of dancing,
singing, and music; and beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I, too, for this day and night will
avoid seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music ; and beautifying and
adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I will observe the
sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I, too,
for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll sleep
in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'

That's the sabbath of the noble ones. When the sabbath of the noble ones
is observed like this it's very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla,
Cetī, Vaccha, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra,
and Kamboja---full of the seven treasures. This wouldn't be worth a
sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. Why is that?
Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the
gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the four great kings is
five hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of
the thirty-three. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the thirty-three is a
thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
thirty-three. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Two hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
of Yama. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make up a
year. The life span of the gods of Yama is two thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Four hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
joyful gods. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make
up a year. The life span of the joyful gods is four thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the joyful gods. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Eight hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
who love to imagine. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such
months make up a year. The life span of the gods who love to imagine is
eight thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods who love
to imagine. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human kingship
is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The life span of the gods who
control what is imagined by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink alcohol.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed, `<j>`{=html}or a mat on the ground.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha, `<j>`{=html}who has gone to suffering's end.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or lustrous gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the sabbath with its eight factors,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

</article>

[]{#an3-anandavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Ānanda {#an3-anandavagga.xhtml_an3-anandavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.71">

#### [AN 3.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Channa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Channasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the wanderer Channa went up to Venerable
Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, do you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?"

"We do, reverend."

"But what drawbacks have you seen, Reverend Ānanda, that you advocate
giving up greed, hate, and delusion?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness. A
greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
greed has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. A greedy person doesn't truly understand what's for
their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. When greed has
been given up, they truly understand what's for their own good, the good
of another, or the good of both. Greed is a destroyer of sight, vision,
and knowledge. It blocks wisdom, it's on the side of anguish, and it
doesn't lead to extinguishment.

A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. ...

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness. A
deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
delusion has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. A deluded person doesn't truly understand what's for
their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. When delusion
has been given up, they truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. Delusion is a destroyer of sight,
vision, and knowledge; it blocks wisdom, it's on the side of anguish,
and it doesn't lead to extinguishment.

This is the drawback we've seen in greed, hate, and delusion, and this
is why we advocate giving them up."

"But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for giving up that greed,
hate, and delusion?"

"There is, reverend, a path and a practice for giving up that greed,
hate, and delusion."

"Well, what is it?"

"It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this is the
practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion."

"This is a fine path, a fine practice, for giving up that greed, hate,
and delusion. Just this much is enough to be diligent."

</article>
<article id="an3.72">

#### [AN 3.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Disciple of the Ājīvakas ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ājīvakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery. Then a householder who was a disciple of the Ājīvaka ascetics
went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, whose teaching is well explained? Who in the world is
practicing well? Who in the world has done well?"

"Well then, householder, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, householder? Is the teaching of
those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion well explained
or not? Or how do you see this?"

"The teaching of those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion
is well explained. That's how I see it."

"What do you think, householder? Are those who practice for giving up
greed, hate, and delusion practicing well or not? Or how do you see
this?"

"Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion are
practicing well. That's how I see it."

"What do you think, householder? Have those who've given up greed, hate,
and delusion---so they're cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future---done well in the world,
or not? Or how do you see this?"

"Those who've given up greed, hate, and delusion have done well in the
world. That's how I see it."

"So, householder, you've declared: 'The teaching of those who teach for
giving up greed, hate, and delusion is well explained.' And you've
declared: 'Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion
are practicing well.' And you've declared: 'Those who've given up greed,
hate, and delusion have done well in the world.'"

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! There's no acclaiming your own
teaching or disrespecting someone else's, just teaching what's relevant
in that context. The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved.
You, sir, teach Dhamma for giving up greed, hate, and delusion. Your
teaching is well explained. You, sir, practice for giving up greed,
hate, and delusion. You in the world are practicing well. You've given
up greed, hate, and delusion. You in the world have done well.

Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Master Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge
to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this
day forth, may Master Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone
for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an3.73">

#### [AN 3.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahānāma the Sakyan ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahānāmasakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Now at
that time the Buddha had recently recovered from an illness. Then
Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"For a long time, sir, I have understood your teaching like this:
'Knowledge is for those with immersion, not those without immersion.'
But, sir, does immersion come first, then knowledge? Or does knowledge
come first, then immersion?"

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "The Buddha has recently recovered from
an illness, and this Mahānāma asks him a question that's too deep. Why
don't I take him off to one side and teach him the Dhamma?"

Then Ānanda took Mahānāma by the arm, led him off to one side, and said
to him, "Mahānāma, the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and
wisdom of a trainee; and the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of an adept.
What is the ethics of a trainee? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. This is called the ethics of a trainee.

And what is the immersion of a trainee? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called the immersion of
a trainee.

And what is the wisdom of a trainee? They truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called the wisdom of a trainee.

Then a noble disciple---accomplished in ethics, immersion, and
wisdom---realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements.

In this way the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom
of both a trainee and an adept."

</article>
<article id="an3.74">

#### [AN 3.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Jains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nigaṇṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood,
in the hall with the peaked roof. Then the Licchavis Abhaya and
Paṇḍitakumāra went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan claims to be all-knowing and
all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:
'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me,
while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' He advocates the
elimination of past deeds by fervent mortification, and breaking the
bridge by not doing any new deeds. So with the ending of deeds,
suffering ends; with the ending of suffering, feeling ends; and with the
ending of feeling, all suffering will have been worn away. This is how
to go beyond suffering by means of this purification by wearing away in
the present life. What, sir, does the Buddha say about this?"

"Abhaya, these three kinds of purification by wearing away have been
rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment. What
three?

It's when, Abhaya, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic
code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Then a mendicant accomplished in ethics, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Then a mendicant accomplished in immersion realizes the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

These are the three kinds of purification by wearing away that have been
rightly explained by the Buddha ... in order to realize extinguishment."

When he said this, Paṇḍitakumāra said to Abhaya, "Dear Abhaya, is there
anything in what Ānanda has said so well that you would disagree with?"

"How could I not agree with what was said so well by Ānanda? If anyone
didn't agree with him, their head would explode!"

</article>
<article id="an3.75">

#### [AN 3.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Support ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nivesakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in three things. What three?

Experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

Experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained
by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.'

Experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct, systematic, and
proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is
the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field
of merit for the world.'

There might be change in the four principal states---earth, water, air,
and fire---but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the
Buddha would never change. In this context, 'change' means that such a
noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost
realm: this is quite impossible.

There might be change in the four principal states---earth, water, air,
and fire---but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the
teaching ... or the Saṅgha would never change. In this context, 'change'
means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible.

Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to---friends
and colleagues, relatives and family---should be encouraged, supported,
and established in these three things."

</article>
<article id="an3.76">

#### [AN 3.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Continued Existence (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamabhavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'continued existence'. How is
continued existence defined?"

"If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would
continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a lower realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would
continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a middle realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued
existence in the formless realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a higher realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.
That's how continued existence is defined."

</article>
<article id="an3.77">

#### [AN 3.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Continued Existence (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyabhavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'continued existence'. How is
continued existence defined?"

"If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would
continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a lower realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would
continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a middle realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued
existence in the formless realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the
moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a higher realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.
That's how continued existence is defined."

</article>
<article id="an3.78">

#### [AN 3.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Precepts and Observances ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlabbatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, are all precepts and observances,
lifestyles, and spiritual paths fruitful when taken as the essence?"

"This matter is not categorical, sir."

"Well then, Ānanda, break it down."

"Take the case of someone who cultivates precepts and observances, a
lifestyle, and a spiritual path, taking this as the essence. If
unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline, that's not
fruitful. However, if unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow, that is fruitful."

That's what Ānanda said, and the teacher approved.

Then Ānanda, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right,
before leaving. Then, not long after Ānanda had left, the Buddha
addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, Ānanda is a trainee, but it's not
easy to find his equal in wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an3.79">

#### [AN 3.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fragrances ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gandhajātasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, there are these three kinds of fragrance that spread only with the
wind, not against it. What three? The fragrance of roots, heartwood, and
flowers. These are the three kinds of fragrance that spread only with
the wind, not against it. Is there a kind of fragrance that spreads with
the wind, and against it, and both ways?"

"There is, Ānanda, such a kind of fragrance."

"So what, sir, is that kind of fragrance?"

"It's when, Ānanda, in some village or town, a woman or man has gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They don't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. They're ethical, of good
character. They live at home with a heart rid of the stain of
stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to
charity, loving to give and to share.

Ascetics and brahmins everywhere praise them for these good qualities;
even the deities praise them. This is the kind of fragrance that spreads
with the wind, and against it, and both.

> The fragrance of flowers `<j>`{=html}doesn't spread against the wind,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> nor sandalwood, pinwheel flowers, or jasmine;\
> but the fragrance of the good `<j>`{=html}spreads against the wind;
> `</j>`{=html}\
> a true person's virtue spreads in every direction."

</article>
<article id="an3.80">

#### [AN 3.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lesser ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cūḷanikāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Ānanda, the Buddha Sikhī had a disciple called Abhibhū. Standing in the
Brahmā realm, he could make his voice heard throughout the thousandfold
galaxy.' I wonder how far a Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha can make their voice heard?"

"He was a disciple, Ānanda. Realized Ones are immeasurable."

For a second time ...

For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha: "... I wonder how far a
Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha can make their
voice heard?"

"Ānanda, have you heard of a thousandfold lesser world system, a
galaxy?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
speak. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, a galaxy extends a thousand times as far as the moon and sun
revolve and the shining ones light up the quarters. In that galaxy there
are a thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of
mountains, a thousand Black Plum Tree Lands, a thousand Western
Continents, a thousand Northern Continents, a thousand Eastern
Continents, four thousand oceans, four thousand great kings, a thousand
realms of the gods of the four great kings, a thousand realms of the
gods of the thirty-three, of the gods of Yama, of the joyful gods, of
the gods who love to imagine, of the gods who control what is imagined
by others, and a thousand Brahmā realms. This is called a thousandfold
lesser world system, a 'galaxy'.

A world system that extends for a thousand galaxies is called a
millionfold middling world system, a 'galactic cluster'.

A world system that extends for a thousand galactic clusters is called a
billionfold great world system, a 'galactic supercluster'.

If he wished, Ānanda, a Realized One could make his voice heard
throughout a galactic supercluster, or as far as he wants."

"But how would the Buddha make his voice heard so far?"

"First, Ānanda, a Realized One would fill the galactic supercluster with
light. When sentient beings saw the light, the Realized One would
project his call so that they'd hear the sound. That's how a Realized
One could make his voice heard throughout a galactic supercluster, or as
far as he wants."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said, "I'm so fortunate, so very
fortunate, to have a teacher with such power and might!"

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to Venerable Ānanda, "What is it
to you, Reverend Ānanda, if your teacher has such power and might?"

When he said this, the Buddha said to Venerable Udāyī, "Not so, Udāyī,
not so! If Ānanda were to die while still not free of greed, he would
rule as king of the gods for seven lifetimes, or as king of the Black
Plum Tree Land for seven lifetimes, because of the confidence of his
heart. However, Ānanda will be extinguished in the present life."

</article>

[]{#an3-samanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Ascetics {#an3-samanavagga.xhtml_an3-samanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.81">

#### [AN 3.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ascetics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three duties of an ascetic. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three duties of an ascetic.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.82">

#### [AN 3.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Donkey ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gadrabhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Suppose, mendicants, a donkey followed behind a herd of cattle,
thinking: 'I can moo too! I can moo too!' But it doesn't look like a
cow, or sound like a cow, or leave a footprint like a cow. Still it
follows behind a herd of cattle, thinking: 'I can moo too! I can moo
too!'

In the same way, some mendicant follows behind the mendicant Saṅgha,
thinking: 'I'm a monk too! I'm a monk too!' But they don't have the same
enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher
mind, and the higher wisdom as the other mendicants. Still they follow
behind the mendicant Saṇgha, thinking: 'I'm a monk too! I'm a monk too!'

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.83">

#### [AN 3.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fields ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khettasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a farmer has three primary duties. What three? A farmer
first of all makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. Next they
plant seeds in season. When the time is right, they irrigate the field
and then drain it. These are the three primary duties of a farmer.

In the same way, a mendicant has three primary duties. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three primary duties of a mendicant.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.84">

#### [AN 3.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Vajji ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vajjiputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then a certain Vajji monk went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules are
recited. I'm not able to train in them."

"But monk, are you able to train in three trainings: the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom?"

"I am, sir."

"So, monk, you should train in these three trainings: the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

As you train in these, you will give up greed, hate, and delusion. Then
you won't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad."

After some time that monk trained in the higher ethics, the higher mind,
and the higher wisdom. He gave up greed, hate, and delusion. Then he
didn't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad.

</article>
<article id="an3.85">

#### [AN 3.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sekkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this person called 'a trainee'. How is a trainee
defined?"

"They train, mendicant, that's why they're called 'a trainee'. What is
their training? They train in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and
the higher wisdom. They train, that's why they're called 'a trainee'.

> As a trainee trains,\
> following the straight road,\
> first they know about ending;\
> enlightenment follows in the same lifetime.
>
> Then the knowledge comes\
> such a one, freed through enlightenment,\
> with the end of the fetters of continued existence:\
> 'My freedom is unshakable.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.86">

#### [AN 3.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasikkhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then
make an end of suffering.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and
immersion, but has limited wisdom. They break some lesser and minor
training rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say
they're incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their
precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting
the spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules,
but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of
that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the
training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They
keep the rules they've undertaken. They realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These training rules are not a waste,
I say."

</article>
<article id="an3.87">

#### [AN 3.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasikkhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual life. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters they have at most seven rebirths. They will
transmigrate at most seven times among gods and humans and then make an
end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, they go from family
to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families and then
make an end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, they're a
one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then
make an end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they're a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and
immersion, but has limited wisdom. They break some lesser and minor
training rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say
they're incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their
precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting
the spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the
Akaniṭṭha realm. With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished with extra effort. With the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished without extra effort. With the ending of
the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon landing. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between one life
and the next.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules,
but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of
that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the
training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They
keep the rules they've undertaken. They realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These training rules are not a waste,
I say."

</article>
<article id="an3.88">

#### [AN 3.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasikkhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are
restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of that.
But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training
rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the
rules they've undertaken.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished between one life and the next.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished upon landing.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished without extra effort.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished with extra effort.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they're a once-returner.
They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters,
they're a one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human
existence, then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they
go from family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three
families and then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they
have at most seven rebirths. They will transmigrate at most seven times
among gods and humans and then make an end of suffering.

So, mendicants, if you practice fully you succeed fully. If you practice
partially you succeed partially. These training rules are not a waste, I
say."

</article>
<article id="an3.89">

#### [AN 3.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Three Trainings (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasikkhattayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these are the three trainings. What three? The training in
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

And what is the training in the higher ethics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault,
they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is called the training in
the higher ethics.

And what is the training in the higher mind? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called
the training in the higher mind.

And what is the training in the higher wisdom? They truly understand:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called the training in the higher
wisdom. These are the three trainings."

</article>
<article id="an3.90">

#### [AN 3.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Three Trainings (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasikkhattayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these are the three trainings. What three? The training in
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

And what is the training in the higher ethics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault,
they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is called the training in
the higher ethics.

And what is the training in the higher mind? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called
the training in the higher mind.

And what is the training in the higher wisdom? It's when a mendicant
realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. This is called the training in the higher
wisdom. These are the three trainings.

> The higher ethics, the higher mind,\
> and the higher wisdom should be practiced\
> by those energetic, steadfast, and resolute,\
> practicing absorption, mindful, with guarded senses.
>
> As before, so behind;\
> as behind, so before.\
> As below, so above;\
> as above, so below.
>
> As by day, so by night;\
> as by night, so by day.\
> Having mastered every direction\
> with limitless immersion,
>
> they call them a 'trainee on the path',\
> and 'one living a pure life'.\
> But a wise one who has gone to the end of the path\
> they call a 'Buddha' in the world.
>
> With the cessation of consciousness,\
> freed by the ending of craving,\
> the liberation of their heart\
> is like a lamp going out."

</article>
<article id="an3.91">

#### [AN 3.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Paṅkadhā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅkavāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. He arrived at a town of the
Kosalans named Paṅkadhā, and stayed there.

Now, at that time a monk called Kassapagotta was resident at Paṅkadhā.
There the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the
mendicants with a Dhamma talk about the training rules. Kassapagotta
became quite impatient and bitter, thinking, "This ascetic is much too
strict."

When the Buddha had stayed in Paṅkadhā as long as he pleased, he set out
for Rājagaha. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Rājagaha, and
stayed there.

Soon after the Buddha left, Kassapagotta became quite remorseful and
regretful, thinking, "It's my loss, my misfortune, that when the Buddha
was talking about the training rules I became quite impatient and
bitter, thinking he was much too strict. Why don't I go to the Buddha
and confess my mistake to him?"

Then Kassapagotta set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and
robe, set out for Rājagaha. Eventually he came to Rājagaha and the
Vulture's Peak. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened, saying:

"I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of
me to become impatient and bitter when the Buddha was educating,
encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk
about the training rules, and to think, 'This ascetic is much too
strict.' Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will
restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Kassapa, you made a mistake. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future.

Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who doesn't want to train
and doesn't praise taking up the training. They don't encourage other
mendicants who don't want to train to take up the training. And they
don't truthfully and correctly praise at the right time those mendicants
who do want to train. I don't praise that kind of senior mendicant. Why
is that? Because, hearing that I praised that mendicant, other
mendicants might want to keep company with them. Then they might follow
their example, which would be for their lasting harm and suffering.
That's why I don't praise that kind of senior mendicant.

Take the case of a middle mendicant who doesn't want to train ...

Take the case of a junior mendicant who doesn't want to train ... That's
why I don't praise that kind of junior mendicant.

Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who does want to train and
praises taking up the training. They encourage other mendicants who
don't want to train to take up the training. And they truthfully and
correctly praise at the right time those mendicants who do want to
train. I praise that kind of senior mendicant. Why is that? Because,
hearing that I praised that mendicant, other mendicants might want to
keep company with them. Then they might follow their example, which
would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. That's why I praise
that kind of senior mendicant.

Take the case of a middle mendicant who wants to train ...

Take the case of a junior mendicant who wants to train ... That's why I
praise that kind of junior mendicant."

</article>

[]{#an3-lonakapallavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Lump of Salt {#an3-lonakapallavagga.xhtml_an3-lonakapallavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.92">

#### [AN 3.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Urgent ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Accāyikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a farmer has three urgent duties. What three? A farmer
swiftly makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. Next they
swiftly plant seeds in season. When the time is right, they swiftly
irrigate or drain the field. These are the three urgent duties of a
farmer. That farmer has no special power or ability to say: 'Let the
crops germinate today! Let them flower tomorrow! Let them ripen the day
after!' But there comes a time when that farmer's crops germinate,
flower, and ripen as the seasons change.

In the same way, a mendicant has three urgent duties. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three urgent duties of a mendicant. That
mendicant has no special power or ability to say: 'Let my mind be freed
from defilements by not grasping today! Or tomorrow! Or the day after!'
But there comes a time---as that mendicant trains in the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom---that their mind is freed from
defilements by not grasping.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.93">

#### [AN 3.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Seclusion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pavivekasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, wanderers of other religions advocate three kinds of
seclusion. What three? Seclusion in robes, almsfood, and lodgings.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in robes.
They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. This is what
wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in robes.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
almsfood. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. This is
what the wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
almsfood.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
lodgings. They stay in a wilderness, at the root of a tree, in a charnel
ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw, or a threshing-hut.
This is what wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
lodgings. These are the three kinds of seclusion that wanderers of other
religions advocate.

In this teaching and training, there are three kinds of seclusion for a
mendicant. What three? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, giving up
unethical conduct, being secluded from it. They have right view, giving
up wrong view, being secluded from it. They've ended defilements, giving
up defilements, being secluded from them. When a mendicant has these
three kinds of seclusion, they're called a mendicant who has reached the
peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core.

When a farmer's rice field is ripe, they'd have the rice cut swiftly,
gathered swiftly, transported swiftly, made into heaps swiftly, threshed
swiftly, the straw removed swiftly, winnowed swiftly, brought over
swiftly, pounded swiftly, and have the husks removed swiftly. In this
way that farmer's crop would reach the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core.

In the same way, when a mendicant is ethical, giving up unethical
conduct, being secluded from it; when they have right view, giving up
wrong view, being secluded from it; when they've ended defilements,
giving up defilements, being secluded from them: they're called a
mendicant who has reached the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core."

</article>
<article id="an3.94">

#### [AN 3.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Autumn ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saradasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates.

In the same way, when the stainless, immaculate vision of the teaching
arises in a noble disciple, three fetters are given up: substantialist
view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances.

Afterwards they get rid of two things: covetousness and ill will. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. If that noble disciple passed away at that time, they're
bound by no fetter that might return them to this world."

</article>
<article id="an3.95">

#### [AN 3.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assemblies ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these are the three assemblies. What three? An assembly of
the best, a divided assembly, and a harmonious assembly.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders.
Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
And those who come afterwards follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the
lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called
an assembly of the best.

And what is a divided assembly? An assembly where the mendicants argue,
quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words.
This is called a divided assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly.

When the mendicants live in harmony like this, they create much merit.
At that time the mendicants live in a holy dwelling, that is, the
heart's release by rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up.
When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the
body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind
becomes immersed in samādhi.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean.

In the same way, when the mendicants are in harmony, appreciating each
other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding
each other with kindly eyes, they create much merit. At that time the
mendicants live in a holy dwelling, that is, the heart's release by
rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is
full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil,
they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi.

These are the three assemblies."

</article>
<article id="an3.96">

#### [AN 3.96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant truly understands:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.97">

#### [AN 3.97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king, ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. That's how a
mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.98">

#### [AN 3.98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.99">

#### [AN 3.99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Jute ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Potthakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Jute canvas is ugly, unpleasant to touch, and worthless whether it's
new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out jute canvas for scrubbing
pots, or else they just throw it away on the rubbish heap.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is unethical, of bad character,
this is how they're ugly, I say. That person is just as ugly as jute
canvas. If you associate with, accompany, and attend to that person,
following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and suffering.
This is how they're unpleasant to touch, I say. That person is just as
unpleasant to touch as jute canvas. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are not very
fruitful or beneficial for the donor. This is how they're worthless, I
say. That person is just as worthless as jute canvas.

If a middle mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ... If you associate with, accompany, and attend to
that person, following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and
suffering. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks among the Saṅgha, the mendicants say:
'What's an incompetent fool like you got to say? How on earth could you
imagine you've got something worth saying!' That person becomes angry
and upset, and blurts out things that make the Saṅgha throw them out, as
if they were throwing jute canvas away on the rubbish heap.

Cloth from Kāsi is beautiful, pleasant to touch, and valuable whether
it's new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out cloth from Kāsi for
wrapping, or else they place it in a fragrant casket.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is ethical, of good character,
this is how they're beautiful, I say. That person is just as beautiful
as cloth from Kāsi. If you associate with, accompany, and attend to such
a person, following their example, it will be for your lasting welfare
and happiness. This is how they're pleasant to touch, I say. That person
is just as pleasant to touch as cloth from Kāsi. Any robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are
very fruitful and beneficial for the donor. This is how they're
valuable, I say. That person is just as valuable as cloth from Kāsi.

If a middle mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks in the midst of the Saṅgha, the
mendicants say: 'Venerables, be quiet! The senior mendicant is speaking
on the teaching and training.'

So you should train like this: 'We will be like cloth from Kāsi, not
like jute canvas.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an3.100">

#### [AN 3.100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Lump of Salt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Loṇakapallasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a
deed, they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual
life could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Take the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them
in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad deed, but
experiences it in the present life, without even a bit left over, let
alone a lot.

What kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell?
A person who hasn't developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, or
wisdom. They're small-minded and mean-spirited, living in suffering.
That kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell.

What kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it
in the present life, without even a bit left over, let alone a lot? A
person who has developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and
wisdom. They're not small-minded, but are big-hearted, living without
limits. That kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but
experiences it in the present life, without even a bit left over, not to
speak of a lot.

Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into a small bowl of water.
What do you think, mendicants? Would that small bowl of water become
salty and undrinkable?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because there is only a little water in the
bowl."

"Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into the Ganges river. What
do you think, mendicants? Would the Ganges river become salty and
undrinkable?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because the Ganges river is a vast mass of
water."

"This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in the present life, without even a
bit left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Take the case of a person who is thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. While another person isn't
thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred
dollars.

What kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is poor, with few possessions
and little wealth. That kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing
half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

What kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is rich, affluent, and
wealthy. That kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but they go to hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad
deed, but experiences it in the present life, without even a bit left
over, not to speak of a lot. ...

It's like a sheep dealer or butcher. They can execute, jail, fine, or
otherwise punish one person who steals from them, but not another.

What kind of person can they punish? A person who is poor, with few
possessions and little wealth. That's the kind of person they can
punish.

What kind of person can't they punish? A ruler or their minister who is
rich, affluent, and wealthy. That's the kind of person they can't
punish. In fact, all they can do is raise their joined palms and ask:
'Please, good sir, give me my sheep or pay me for it.'

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in the present life, without even a
bit left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed,
they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual life
could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete end of
suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an3.101">

#### [AN 3.101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Panner ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṁsudhovakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Native gold has coarse corruptions: sand, soil, and gravel. A panner or
their apprentice pours it into a pan, where they wash, rinse, and clean
it. When that's been eliminated, there are medium corruptions in the
native gold: fine grit and coarse sand. The panner washes it again. When
that's been eliminated, there are fine corruptions in the native gold:
fine sand and black grime. The panner washes it again. When that's been
eliminated, only golden flecks remain. A goldsmith or their apprentice
places the native gold in a crucible where they blow, melt, and smelt
it. Still the native gold is not settled and the dross is not totally
gone. It's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not
completely ready for working. But the goldsmith keeps on blowing,
melting, and smelting it. The native gold becomes pliable, workable, and
radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can
successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet,
earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant who is committed to the higher mind has
coarse corruptions: bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. A sincere,
capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and
obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are middling
corruptions: sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A sincere, capable
mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are fine corruptions:
thoughts of family, country, and being looked up to. A sincere, capable
mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, only thoughts about the
teaching are left. That immersion is not peaceful or sublime or tranquil
or unified, but is held in place by forceful suppression.

But there comes a time when that mind is stilled internally; it settles,
unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. That immersion is peaceful and
sublime and tranquil and unified, not held in place by forceful
suppression. They extend the mind to realize by insight each and every
thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing
those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and
powerful; controlling my body as far as the Brahmā realm.' They are
capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within
range.

If they wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is
within range.

If they wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi as "mind
immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in samādhi as "mind not
immersed in samādhi"; freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as
"unfreed mind".' They are capable of realizing these things, since each
and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away
and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good
place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings are
reborn according to their deeds.' They are capable of realizing these
things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of realizing
these things, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an3.102">

#### [AN 3.102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Basis ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nimittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on
three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity.

If a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses solely on the basis
of immersion, it's likely their mind will incline to laziness.

If they focus solely on the basis of exertion, it's likely their mind
will incline to restlessness.

If they focus solely on the basis of equanimity, it's likely their mind
won't properly become immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements.

But when a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to
time on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of
defilements.

It's like when a goldsmith or a goldsmith's apprentice prepares a forge,
fires the crucible, picks up some native gold with tongs and puts it in
the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they
sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. If
they solely fanned it, the native gold would likely be scorched. If they
solely sprinkled water on it, the native gold would likely cool down. If
they solely watched over it, the native gold would likely not be
properly processed. But when that goldsmith fans it from time to time,
sprinkles water on it from time to time, and watches over it from time
to time, that native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can successfully
create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a
necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus
on three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity. ...

When a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to time
on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of
defilements. They extend the mind to realize by insight each and every
thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing
those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power' ...

'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both
kinds of sounds, human and divine, whether near or far.' ... 'May I
recollect many kinds of past lives.' ... 'With clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and
being reborn.' ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range."

</article>

[]{#an3-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Third Fifty {#an3-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an3-tatiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Awakening {#an3-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an3-sambodhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.103">

#### [AN 3.103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Before Awakening ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pubbevasambodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification in the world?
What's the drawback? What's the escape?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from the
world: this is its gratification.

That the world is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its
drawback.

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the world: this is its
escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn't announce my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.104">

#### [AN 3.104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gratification (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaassādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I went in search of the world's gratification, and I found
it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in
the world. I went in search of the world's drawbacks, and I found them.
I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawbacks in the
world. I went in search of escape from the world, and I found it. I've
seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the world.

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce my supreme
perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in
this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.105">

#### [AN 3.105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gratification (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaassādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the world, sentient
beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But because there is gratification in
the world, sentient beings are aroused by it.

If the world had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But since the world has a drawback, sentient
beings do grow disillusioned with it.

If there were no escape from the world, sentient beings wouldn't escape
from it. But since there is an escape from the world, sentient beings do
escape from it.

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven't
escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---and
they don't live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, they've escaped from this
world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---and they live detached,
liberated, with a mind free of limits."

</article>
<article id="an3.106">

#### [AN 3.106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ascetics and Brahmins ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
the world's gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I
don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having
realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I deem them as
true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own
insight."

</article>
<article id="an3.107">

#### [AN 3.107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wailing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ruṇṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Singing is regarded as wailing in the training of the Noble One.
Dancing is regarded as madness. Too much laughter, showing the teeth, is
regarded as childish. So break off singing and dancing; and when you're
appropriately pleased, it's enough to simply smile."

</article>
<article id="an3.108">

#### [AN 3.108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Satisfaction ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atittisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three indulgences that never satisfy. What three?
Sleep, alcoholic drinks, and sexual intercourse. These are the three
indulgences that never satisfy."

</article>
<article id="an3.109">

#### [AN 3.109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unprotected ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arakkhitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when the mind is unprotected, deeds of body, speech, and
mind are unprotected. When deeds are unprotected, they fester. When
deeds fester, they become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are unprotected. They fester, and become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and
mental deeds are unprotected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

When the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are
protected. When deeds are protected, they don't fester. When deeds don't
fester, they don't become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind aren't rotten will have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are protected. They don't get soaked, and they don't become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental
deeds are protected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind
aren't rotten will have a good death."

</article>
<article id="an3.110">

#### [AN 3.110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fallen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byāpannasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika:

"Householder, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds
are fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen
will not have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The
roof peak, rafters, and walls fall in. In the same way, when the mind is
fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. Someone whose deeds
of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death.

When the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not
fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen
will have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof
peak, rafters, and walls are not fallen in. In the same way, when the
mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen.
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a
good death."

</article>
<article id="an3.111">

#### [AN 3.111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sources (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.
Any deed that emerges from greed, hate, or delusion---born, sourced, and
originated from greed, hate, or delusion---is unskillful, blameworthy,
results in suffering, and leads to the creation of more deeds, not their
cessation. These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to
deeds. Any deed that emerges from contentment, love, or
understanding---born, sourced, and originated from contentment, love, or
understanding---is skillful, blameless, results in happiness, and leads
to the cessation of more deeds, not their creation. These are three
sources that give rise to deeds."

</article>
<article id="an3.112">

#### [AN 3.112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sources (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three?

Desire comes up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past,
future, or present. And how does desire come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? In your
heart you think about and consider things that stimulate desire and
greed in the past, future, or present. When you do this, desire comes
up, and you get attached to those things. This lust in the heart is what
I call a fetter. That's how desire comes up for things that stimulate
desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Desire doesn't come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the
past, future, or present. And how does desire not come up for things
that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? You
understand the future result of things that stimulate desire and greed
in the past, future, or present. When you know this, you grow
disillusioned, your heart becomes dispassionate, and you see it with
penetrating wisdom. That's how desire doesn't come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds."

</article>

[]{#an3-apayikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Bound for Loss {#an3-apayikavagga.xhtml_an3-apayikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.113">

#### [AN 3.113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bound for Loss ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āpāyikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault. What three?

Someone who is unchaste, but claims to be celibate; someone who makes a
groundless accusation of unchastity against a person whose celibacy is
pure; and someone who has the view, 'There is nothing wrong with sensual
pleasures,' so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures.

These are the three who are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault."

</article>
<article id="an3.114">

#### [AN 3.114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rare ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dullabhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the appearance of three people is rare in the world. What
three? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these three
people is rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.115">

#### [AN 3.115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immeasurable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appameyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?
Someone easy to measure, someone hard to measure, and someone who is
immeasurable.

And who is the person easy to measure? It's a person who is restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties. This is called 'a person easy to measure'.

And who is the person hard to measure? It's a person who is not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued. They have
established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with
unified mind and restrained faculties. This is called 'a person hard to
measure'.

And who is the immeasurable person? It's a mendicant who is perfected,
and has ended defilements. This is called 'an immeasurable person'.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.116">

#### [AN 3.116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Imperturbable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āneñjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?

First, a person, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the
ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of infinite space. The lifespan of the gods of
infinite space is twenty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there
until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the
animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're
extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a learned
noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place
of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. They enjoy it and like it and find
it satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on
it often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company
of the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness. The lifespan of
the gods of infinite consciousness is forty thousand eons. An ordinary
person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they
go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the
Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then
they're extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a
learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their
place of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of nothingness. The lifespan of the gods of
nothingness is sixty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal
realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that
very life. This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and
an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.117">

#### [AN 3.117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Failures and Accomplishments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vipattisampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view. And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills
living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure
in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an3.118">

#### [AN 3.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unfailing Dice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Apaṇṇakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. It's like
throwing unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same
way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of
failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. It's like throwing
unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same way,
some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics,
mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an3.119">

#### [AN 3.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Action ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kammantasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is failure in action? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in action'.

And what is failure in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has wrong
livelihood and earns a living by wrong livelihood. This is called
'failure in livelihood'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is accomplishment in action? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'accomplishment
in action'.

And what is accomplishment in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has
right livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called
'accomplishment in livelihood'.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'accomplishment in view'.

These are the three accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an3.120">

#### [AN 3.120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Purity (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasoceyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when someone doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. This is called 'purity of
body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when someone doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind? It's when someone is content, kind-hearted,
and has right view. This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity."

</article>
<article id="an3.121">

#### [AN 3.121]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Purity (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasoceyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'purity of body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands 'I have
sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them, they
understand 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand how
sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up; and
how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have ill will in them they understand 'I have ill will in me';
and when they don't have ill will in them they understand 'I don't have
ill will in me'. They understand how ill will arises; how, when it's
already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't
arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them they understand 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me'; and when they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them they understand 'I don't have dullness and drowsiness
in me'. They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when
they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're given
up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have restlessness and remorse in them they understand 'I have
restlessness and remorse in me'; and when they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them they understand 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me'. They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them they understand 'I have doubt in me'; and
when they don't have doubt in them they understand 'I don't have doubt
in me'. They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity.

> Purity of body, purity of speech,\
> and undefiled purity of heart.\
> A pure person, blessed with purity,\
> has washed off all bad things, they say."

</article>
<article id="an3.122">

#### [AN 3.122]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sagacity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Moneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. What three?
Sagacity of body, speech, and mind.

And what is sagacity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'sagacity of body'.

And what is sagacity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'sagacity
of speech'.

And what is sagacity of mind? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is called 'sagacity of mind'. These are the three
kinds of sagacity.

> A sage in body, a sage in speech,\
> a sage undefiled in heart;\
> a sage, blessed with sagacity,\
> has given up everything, they say."

</article>

[]{#an3-kusinaravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter at Kusināra {#an3-kusinaravagga.xhtml_an3-kusinaravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.123">

#### [AN 3.123]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kusinārā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kusinārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kusinārā, in the Forest of
Offerings. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or
village. A householder or their child approaches and invites them for
the next day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they want. When the night
has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and
approach that householder's home, where they sit on the seat spread out.
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own
hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

The mendicant thinks: 'It's so good that this householder serves me with
delicious fresh and cooked foods.' Then they think: 'I really hope this
householder serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the
future, too.' They eat that food tied, infatuated, attached, blind to
the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. They think about it
with sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A gift to such a mendicant
is not very fruitful, I say. Why is that? Because that mendicant is
negligent.

Take another case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village.
A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next
day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they want. When the night has
passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and
approach that householder's home, where they sit on the seat spread out.
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own
hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

It never occurs to them: 'It's so good that the householder or their
child serves and satisfies me with their own hands with delicious fresh
and cooked foods.' They don't think: 'I really hope this householder
serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the future, too.'
They eat that almsfood untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawback, and understanding the escape. They think about it with
thoughts of renunciation, good will, or harmlessness. A gift to such a
mendicant is very fruitful, I say. Why is that? Because that mendicant
is diligent."

</article>
<article id="an3.124">

#### [AN 3.124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Arguments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaṇḍanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I'm not even comfortable thinking about a place where
mendicants argue---quarreling and disputing, continually wounding each
other with barbed words---let alone going there. I come to a conclusion
about them: 'Clearly those venerables have given up three things and
cultivated three things.' What three things have they given up? Thoughts
of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. What three things have
they cultivated? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. ... I come to a
conclusion about them: 'Clearly those venerables have given up three
things and cultivated three things.'

I feel comfortable going to a place where the mendicants live in
harmony---appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes---let alone
thinking about it. I come to a conclusion about them: 'Clearly those
venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.' What
three things have they given up? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts.
What three things have they cultivated? Thoughts of renunciation, good
will, and harmlessness. ... I come to a conclusion about them: 'Clearly
those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three
things.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.125">

#### [AN 3.125]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Gotamaka Shrine ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gotamakacetiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Gotamaka
Tree-shrine. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I teach based on direct knowledge, not without direct
knowledge. I teach with reasons, not without them. I teach with a
demonstrable basis, not without it. Since this is so, you should follow
my advice and instruction. This is enough for you to feel joyful,
delighted, and happy: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha! The
teaching is well explained! The Saṅgha is practicing well!'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
-thousandfold galaxy shook.

</article>
<article id="an3.126">

#### [AN 3.126]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bharaṇḍu Kālāma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bharaṇḍukālāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans when he
arrived at Kapilavatthu.

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard that he had arrived. He went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and stood to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Go into
Kapilavatthu, Mahānāma, and check if there's a suitable guest house
where I can spend the night."

"Yes, sir," replied Mahānāma. He returned to Kapilavatthu and searched
all over the city, but he couldn't see a suitable guest house for the
Buddha to spend the night.

Then Mahānāma went up to the Buddha, and said to him, "Sir, there's no
suitable guest house in Kapilavatthu for you to spend the night. But
there is this Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma, who used to be the Buddha's spiritual
companion. Why don't you spend the night at his hermitage?"

"Go, Mahānāma, and set out a mat."

"Yes, sir," replied Mahānāma. He went to Bharaṇḍu's hermitage, where he
set out a mat, and got foot-washing water ready. Then he went back to
the Buddha and said to him, "The mat and foot-washing water are set out.
Please, sir, go at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to Bharaṇḍu's hermitage, sat down on the seat
spread out, and washed his feet.

Then it occurred to Mahānāma, "It's too late to pay homage to the Buddha
today. He's tired. Tomorrow I'll pay homage to the Buddha." He bowed to
the Buddha and respectfully circled him, keeping him on his right, then
he left.

Then, when the night had passed, Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the
Buddha, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Mahānāma, there are these three teachers found in the world. What
three? One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual
pleasures, but not of forms or feelings. One teacher advocates the
complete understanding of sensual pleasures and forms, but not of
feelings. One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual
pleasures, forms, and feelings. These are the three teachers found in
the world. Do these three teachers have the same goal or different
goals?"

When he said this, Bharaṇḍu said to Mahānāma, "Say they're the same,
Mahānāma!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, Mahānāma!"

For a second time, Bharaṇḍu said, "Say they're the same, Mahānāma!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, Mahānāma!"

For a third time, Bharaṇḍu said, "Say they're the same, Mahānāma!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, Mahānāma!"

Then it occurred to Bharaṇḍu, "The Buddha has rebuked me three times in
front of this illustrious Mahānāma. Why don't I leave Kapilavatthu?"
Then Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma left Kapilavatthu, never to return.

</article>
<article id="an3.127">

#### [AN 3.127]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Hatthaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Hatthakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Hatthaka, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha. Thinking, "I will stand before the
Buddha," he sank and melted down, and wasn't able to stay still. It's
like when ghee or oil is poured on sand, it sinks and melts down, and
can't remain stable.

Then the Buddha said to Hatthaka, "Hatthaka, manifest a solid
life-form."

"Yes, sir," replied Hatthaka. He manifested a solid life-form, bowed to
the Buddha, and stood to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "Hatthaka, I wonder whether you still promulgate
now the teachings that you promulgated when you were a human being?"

"I still promulgate the teachings that I promulgated as a human being.
And I also promulgate teachings that I didn't promulgate as a human
being.

Just as the Buddha these days lives crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen; by rulers and their ministers, and monastics of other
religions and their disciples, so I live crowded by the gods. The gods
come from far away, thinking, 'We'll hear the teaching in the presence
of Hatthaka.'

Sir, I passed away without getting enough of three things. What three?
Seeing the Buddha; hearing the true teaching; and serving the Saṅgha. I
passed away without getting enough of these three things.

> I could never get enough\
> of seeing the Buddha,\
> serving the Saṅgha,\
> or hearing the teaching.
>
> Training in the higher ethics,\
> loving to hear the true teaching,\
> Hatthaka has gone to the Aviha realm\
> without getting enough of these three things."

</article>
<article id="an3.128">

#### [AN 3.128]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bitter ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kaṭuviyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Varanasi for alms. While the Buddha was walking for alms near
the cow-hitching place at the wavy leaf fig, he saw a disgruntled monk
who was looking for pleasure in external things, unmindful, without
situational awareness or immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined
faculties.

The Buddha said to him, "Monk, don't be bitter. If you're bitter,
festering with putrefaction, flies will, without a doubt, plague and
infest you."

Hearing this advice of the Buddha, that monk was struck with a sense of
urgency. Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, the Buddha
told the mendicants what had happened. ...

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha:

"Sir, what is this 'bitterness'? What is 'putrefaction'? And what are
the 'flies'?"

"Desire is bitterness; ill will is the putrefaction; and bad, unskillful
thoughts are the flies. If you're bitter, festering with putrefaction,
flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you.

> When your eyes and ears are unguarded,\
> and you're not restrained in your sense faculties,\
> flies---those lustful thoughts---\
> will plague you.
>
> A mendicant who's bitter,\
> festering with putrefaction,\
> is far from being extinguished,\
> anguish is their lot.
>
> Whether in village or wilderness,\
> if they don't find serenity in themselves,\
> the fool, void of wisdom,\
> is honored only by flies.
>
> But those who have ethics,\
> lovers of wisdom and peace,\
> they, being peaceful, sleep at ease,\
> since they've got rid of the flies."

</article>
<article id="an3.129">

#### [AN 3.129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Anuruddha (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaanuruddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sometimes, sir, with my clairvoyance that's purified and superhuman, I
see that females---when their body breaks up, after death---are mostly
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. How many
qualities do females have so that they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"When females have three qualities, when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. What three? A female lives at home with a heart full of the stain
of stinginess in the morning, jealousy at midday, and sexual desire in
the evening. When females have these three qualities, when their body
breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an3.130">

#### [AN 3.130]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Anuruddha (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaanuruddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Here's the thing, Reverend Sāriputta. With clairvoyance that is
purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold galaxy. My
energy is roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness is established and
lucid, my body is tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind is immersed in
samādhi. But my mind is not freed from the defilements by not grasping."

"Well, Reverend Anuruddha, when you say: 'With clairvoyance that is
purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold galaxy,'
that's your conceit. And when you say: 'My energy is roused up and
unflagging, my mindfulness is established and lucid, my body is tranquil
and undisturbed, and my mind is immersed in samādhi,' that's your
restlessness. And when you say: 'But my mind is not freed from the
defilements by not grasping,' that's your remorse. It would be good to
give up these three things. Ignore them and apply your mind to freedom
from death."

After some time Anuruddha gave up these three things. Ignoring them, he
applied his mind to freedom from death. Then Anuruddha, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Anuruddha became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="an3.131">

#### [AN 3.131]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Under Cover ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭicchannasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open.
What three? Females are married with a veil, not unveiled. Brahmin hymns
are conveyed under cover, not openly. Wrong view is conveyed under
cover, not in the open. These three things are conveyed under cover, not
in the open.

Three things shine in the open, not under cover. What three? The moon
shines in the open, not under cover. The sun shines in the open, not
under cover. The teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One
shine in the open, not under cover. These three things shine in the
open, not under cover."

</article>
<article id="an3.132">

#### [AN 3.132]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Etchings ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three? A
person like a line drawn in stone, a person like a line drawn in sand,
and a person like a line drawn in water.

And who is the person like a line drawn in stone? It's a person who is
often angry, and their anger lingers for a long time. It's like a line
drawn in stone, which isn't quickly worn away by wind and water, but
lasts for a long time. In the same way, this person is often angry, and
their anger lingers for a long time. This is called a person like a line
drawn in stone.

And who is the person like a line drawn in sand? It's a person who is
often angry, but their anger doesn't linger long. It's like a line drawn
in sand, which is quickly worn away by wind and water, and doesn't last
long. In the same way, this person is often angry, but their anger
doesn't linger long. This is called a person like a line drawn in sand.

And who is the person like a line drawn in water? It's a person who,
though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner,
still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. It's like a line
drawn in water, which vanishes right away, and doesn't last long. In the
same way, a person, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and
disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets
them. This is called a person like a line drawn in water.

These are the three people found in the world."

</article>

[]{#an3-yodhajivavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Warrior {#an3-yodhajivavagga.xhtml_an3-yodhajivavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.133">

#### [AN 3.133]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Warrior ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yodhājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a warrior with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship. What three? He's
a long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who shatters large objects. A
warrior with these three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with three factors is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? They're a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects.

And how is a mendicant a long-distance shooter? It's when a mendicant
truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal
or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.' They truly see any kind of feeling at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* feeling---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of perception at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
perception---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.' They truly see any kind of choices at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* choices---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' That's how a mendicant is a long-distance
shooter.

And how is a mendicant a marksman? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is a
marksman.

And how does a mendicant shatter large objects? It's when a mendicant
shatters the great mass of ignorance. That's how a mendicant shatters
large objects.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an3.134">

#### [AN 3.134]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assemblies ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three assemblies. What three? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, an assembly educated in questioning, and an
assembly educated to the fullest extent. These are the three
assemblies."

</article>
<article id="an3.135">

#### [AN 3.135]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Friend ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has three factors.
What three? They give what is hard to give, they do what is hard to do,
and they bear what is hard to bear. You should associate with a friend
who has these three factors."

</article>
<article id="an3.136">

#### [AN 3.136]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Arising ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uppādāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature
persists, this regularity of natural principles, this invariance of
natural principles: all conditions are impermanent. A Realized One
understands this and comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are
impermanent.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all conditions are suffering. A Realized One understands this and
comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes,
clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are suffering.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all things are not-self. A Realized One understands this and comprehends
it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies,
analyzes, and reveals it: 'All things are not-self.'"

</article>
<article id="an3.137">

#### [AN 3.137]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Hair Blanket ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kesakambalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a hair blanket is said to be the worst kind of woven cloth.
It's cold in the cold, hot in the heat, ugly, smelly, and unpleasant to
touch. In the same way, the teaching of the bamboo-staffed ascetic is
said to be the worst of all the doctrines of the various ascetics and
brahmins.

The bamboo-staffed ascetic, that silly man, has this doctrine and view:
'There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.'

Now, all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived in the
past taught the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who will live in the
future will teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

I too, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha in the present,
teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the bamboo-staffed
ascetic opposes me by saying: 'There is no power in deeds, action, or
energy.'

It's like a trap set at the mouth of a river, which would bring harm,
suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish. In the same way that
futile man the bamboo-staffed ascetic is a trap for humans, it seems to
me. He has come into the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and
disaster of many beings."

</article>
<article id="an3.138">

#### [AN 3.138]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an3.139">

#### [AN 3.139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Growth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vuddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of growth. What three? Growth in
faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three kinds of growth."

</article>
<article id="an3.140">

#### [AN 3.140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Wild Colt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assakhaḷuṅkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild
people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three wild colts? One wild colt is fast, but not beautiful
or well proportioned. Another wild colt is fast and beautiful, but not
well proportioned. While another wild colt is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three wild colts.

And what are the three wild people? One wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another wild person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. But when asked a question about the teaching or
training, they falter without answering. This is how they're not
beautiful, I say. And they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well
proportioned, I say. This is how a wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. But they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I
say. This is how a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? It's
when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how
they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three wild people."

</article>
<article id="an3.141">

#### [AN 3.141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Excellent Horses ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assaparassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three excellent horses and the three
excellent people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three excellent horses? One excellent horse is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent horse is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent horse is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent horses.

"What are the three excellent people? One excellent person is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent person is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, but not beautiful or well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter
without answering. This is how they're not beautiful, I say. And they
don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how
an excellent person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer
without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. But they don't
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how an
excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is
reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are not liable to
return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a
question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering.
This is how they're beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're
well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent people."

</article>
<article id="an3.142">

#### [AN 3.142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three fine thoroughbred horses, and
the three fine thoroughbred people. Listen and apply your mind well, I
will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three fine thoroughbred horses? One fine thoroughbred
horse ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred horses.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? One fine thoroughbred
person ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a fine thoroughbred person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the
teaching or training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're
beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred people."

</article>
<article id="an3.143">

#### [AN 3.143]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamoranivāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of
the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. What three?
The entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an3.144">

#### [AN 3.144]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamoranivāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of
revealing, and a demonstration of instruction.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an3.145">

#### [AN 3.145]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyamoranivāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

</article>

[]{#an3-mangalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Good Fortune {#an3-mangalavagga.xhtml_an3-mangalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.146">

#### [AN 3.146]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unskillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three?
Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three?
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an3.147">

#### [AN 3.147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāvajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three?
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three?
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. Someone with these
three qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an3.148">

#### [AN 3.148]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unethical ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Visamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. ... Unethical deeds
by way of body, speech, and mind. ...

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. ... Ethical deeds
by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.149">

#### [AN 3.149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Impure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asucisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. ... Impure deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. ...

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. ... Pure deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.150">

#### [AN 3.150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and reproved by
sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What three? Unskillful
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What three?
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.151">

#### [AN 3.151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Blameworthy deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. ... Blameless deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.152">

#### [AN 3.152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Unethical deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. ... Ethical deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.153">

#### [AN 3.153]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Impure deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. ... Pure deeds by way of body, speech, and
mind. ..."

</article>
<article id="an3.154">

#### [AN 3.154]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Homage ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vandanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of homage. What three? By way of
body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of homage."

</article>
<article id="an3.155">

#### [AN 3.155]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Morning ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pubbaṇhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, those sentient beings who do good things in the morning by
way of body, speech, and mind have a good morning.

Those sentient beings who do good things at midday by way of body,
speech, and mind have a good midday.

Those sentient beings who do good things in the evening by way of body,
speech, and mind have a good evening.

> A good star, a good fortune,\
> a good dawn, a good rising,\
> a good moment, a good hour:\
> these come with good gifts to spiritual practitioners.
>
> Worthy deeds of body,\
> verbal worthy deeds,\
> worthy deeds of mind,\
> worthy resolutions:\
> when your deeds have been worthy,\
> you get worthy benefits.
>
> Those happy with these benefits\
> flourish in the Buddha's teaching.\
> May you and all your relatives\
> be healthy and happy!"

</article>

[]{#an3-patipadavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Practices {#an3-patipadavagga.xhtml_an3-patipadavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an3-patipadavagga.xhtml_an3.156-162 .section .range}
#### [AN 3.156--162]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Three Practices ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Acelakavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an3.156">

"Mendicants, there are three practices. What three? The addicted
practice, the scorching practice, and the middle practice.

And what's the addicted practice? It's when someone has this doctrine
and view: 'There's nothing wrong with sensual pleasures'; so they throw
themselves into sensual pleasures. This is called the addicted practice.

And what's the scorching practice? It's when someone goes naked,
ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when
called. They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on
their behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything
from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon
or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there
is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home;
or where there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or
meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for
alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to
seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set
intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They're devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening. And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and
tormenting the body. This is called the scorching practice.

And what's the middle practice? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of the mind ...
They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. This is
called the middle practice.

These are the three practices.

</article>
<article id="an3.157">

Mendicants, there are three practices. What three? The addicted
practice, the scorching practice, the middle practice.

And what's the addicted practice? ... This is called the addicted
practice.

And what is the scorching practice? ... This is called the scorching
practice.

And what's the middle practice? It's when a mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful
qualities that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not
lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.158">

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.159">

They develop the faculty of faith ... energy ... mindfulness ...
immersion ... wisdom ...

</article>
<article id="an3.160">

They develop the power of faith ... energy ... mindfulness ... immersion
... wisdom ...

</article>
<article id="an3.161">

They develop the awakening factor of mindfulness ... investigation of
principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ...
equanimity ...

</article>
<article id="an3.162">

They develop right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion ... This is called the middle practice. These are the
three practices."

</article>
:::

[]{#an3-kammapathapeyyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds {#an3-kammapathapeyyavagga.xhtml_an3-kammapathapeyyavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an3-kammapathapeyyavagga.xhtml_an3.163-182 .section .range}
#### [AN 3.163--182]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Three Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kammapathapeyyāla]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an3.163">

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three? They
themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to kill living
creatures. And they approve of killing living creatures.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

</article>
<article id="an3.164">

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three? They
don't themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to not
kill living creatures. And they approve of not killing living creatures.
...

</article>
<article id="an3.165">

They themselves steal. They encourage others to steal. And they approve
of stealing. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.166">

They don't themselves steal. They encourage others to not steal. And
they approve of not stealing. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.167">

They themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of committing sexual
misconduct. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.168">

They don't themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
not commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of not committing sexual
misconduct. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.169">

They themselves lie. They encourage others to lie. And they approve of
lying. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.170">

They don't themselves lie. They encourage others to not lie. And they
approve of not lying. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.171">

They themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to speak
divisively. And they approve of speaking divisively. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.172">

They don't themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to not
speak divisively. And they approve of not speaking divisively. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.173">

They themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to speak harshly.
And they approve of speaking harshly. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.174">

They don't themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to not speak
harshly. And they approve of not speaking harshly. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.175">

They themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to talk nonsense.
And they approve of talking nonsense. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.176">

They don't themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to not talk
nonsense. And they approve of not talking nonsense. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.177">

They themselves are covetous. They encourage others to be covetous. And
they approve of covetousness. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.178">

They themselves are content. They encourage others to be contented. And
they approve of being contented. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.179">

They themselves have ill will. They encourage others to have ill will.
And they approve of having ill will. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.180">

They themselves are kind-hearted. They encourage others to be
kind-hearted. And they approve of kind-heartedness. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.181">

They themselves have wrong view. They encourage others to have wrong
view. And they approve of wrong view. ...

</article>
<article id="an3.182">

They themselves have right view. They encourage others to have right
view. And they approve of right view.

Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
:::

[]{#an3-ragadipeyyalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed {#an3-ragadipeyyalavagga.xhtml_an3-ragadipeyyalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an3.183-352">

#### [AN 3.183--352]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rāgapeyyāla]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, three things should be developed. What three?
Emptiness immersion; signless immersion; and undirected immersion. For
insight into greed, these three things should be developed.

For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ...

hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ... obstinacy
... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ...
insight ... complete understanding ... complete ending ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
For the letting go of negligence, these three things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Threes is finished.

</article>

[]{#an4.xhtml}

# The Book of the Fours {#an4.xhtml_an4 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an4-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an4-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an4-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter at Wares Village {#an4-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an4-bhandagamavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.1">

#### [AN 4.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Understood ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anubuddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Vajjis at Wares Village. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four things,
both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long
time. What four? Noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These
noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and
comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the
conduit to rebirth is ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Ethics, immersion, and wisdom,\
> and the supreme freedom:\
> these things have been understood\
> by Gotama the renowned.
>
> And so the Buddha, having insight,\
> explained this teaching to the mendicants.\
> The teacher made an end of suffering,\
> seeing clearly, he is fully quenched."

</article>
<article id="an4.2">

#### [AN 4.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fallen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Papatitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone without four things is said to have 'fallen from this teaching
and training'. What four? Noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom.
Someone without these four things is said to have 'fallen from this
teaching and training'.

Someone with four things is said to be 'secure in this teaching and
training'. What four? Noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom.
Someone with these four things is said to be 'secure in this teaching
and training'.

> They fall, collapsed and fallen;\
> greedy, they return.\
> The work is done, the joyful is enjoyed,\
> happiness is found through happiness."

</article>
<article id="an4.3">

#### [AN 4.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four? Without
examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism, and
they criticize those deserving of praise. They arouse faith in things
that are dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these four
qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What four?
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of
criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't arouse
faith in things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in things
that are inspiring. When an astute, competent true person has these four
qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to
be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.

> When you praise someone worthy of criticism,\
> or criticize someone worthy of praise,\
> you choose bad luck with your own mouth:\
> you'll never find happiness that way.
>
> Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing,\
> if all you lose is your money\
> and all you own, even yourself.\
> What's really terrible luck\
> is to hate the holy ones.
>
> For more than two quinquadecillion years,\
> and another five quattuordecillion years,\
> a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell,\
> having aimed bad words and thoughts at them."

</article>
<article id="an4.4">

#### [AN 4.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Broken (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward four
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness. What four? Mother ... father ... a Realized One ... and a
disciple of a Realized One. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person
acts wrongly toward these four people they keep themselves broken and
damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people,
and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward four people
they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What
four? Mother ... father ... a Realized One ... and a disciple of a
Realized One. When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward
these four people they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don't
deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create
much merit.

> A person who does wrong\
> by their mother or father,\
> or a Realized One, a Buddha,\
> or one of their disciples,\
> creates much wickedness.
>
> Because of their unprincipled conduct\
> toward their parents,\
> they're criticized in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to be reborn in a place of loss.
>
> A person who does right\
> by their mother and father,\
> or a Realized One, a Buddha,\
> or one of their disciples,\
> creates much merit.
>
> Because of their principled conduct\
> toward their parents,\
> they're praised in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.5">

#### [AN 4.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Stream ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anusotasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These four people are found in the world. What four? A person who goes
with the stream; a person who goes against the stream; a steadfast
person; and a brahmin who has crossed over and stands on the far shore.

And who is the person who goes with the stream? It's a person who takes
part in sensual pleasures and does bad deeds. This is called a person
who goes with the stream.

And who is the person who goes against the stream? It's a person who
doesn't take part in sensual pleasures or do bad deeds. They live the
full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful
faces. This is called a person who goes against the stream.

And who is the steadfast person? It's a person who, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. This is called a
steadfast person.

And who is a brahmin who has crossed over and stands on the far shore?
It's a person who realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is called a brahmin
who has crossed over and stands on the far shore.

These are the four people found in the world.

> All those people with unbridled sensuality,\
> not free of lust, enjoying sensual pleasures in this life:\
> again and again, they return to birth and old age;\
> those who go with the stream are sunk in craving.
>
> So a wise one in this life, `<j>`{=html}with mindfulness established,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> doesn't take part in sensual pleasures and bad deeds.\
> In pain they'd give up sensual pleasures:\
> they call that person `<j>`{=html}'one who goes against the stream'.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Someone who's given up five corruptions,\
> a perfect trainee, not liable to decline,\
> who's mastered their mind, `<j>`{=html}with faculties immersed in
> samādhi, `</j>`{=html}\
> that's called 'a steadfast person'.
>
> The sage who has comprehended all things, `<j>`{=html}high and low,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> cleared them and ended them, so they are no more;\
> they've completed the spiritual journey, `<j>`{=html}and gone to the
> end of the world, `</j>`{=html}\
> they're called 'one who has gone beyond'."

</article>
<article id="an4.6">

#### [AN 4.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Little Learning ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appassutasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? A
person may have:

1.  Little learning and not get the point of learning.
2.  Little learning but get the point of learning.
3.  Much learning but not get the point of learning.
4.  Much learning and get the point of learning.

And how has a person learned little and not got the point of learning?
It's when a person has learned little of the statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And with the little
they've learned, they understand neither the meaning nor the teaching,
nor do they practice in line with the teaching. That's how a person has
learned little and not got the point of learning.

And how has a person learned little but has got the point of learning?
It's when a person has learned little of the statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But with the little
they've learned, they understand the meaning and the teaching, and they
practice in line with the teaching. That's how a person has learned
little but has got the point of learning.

And how has a person learned much but hasn\'t got the point of learning?
It's when a person has learned much of the statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But even though they've
learned much, they understand neither the meaning nor the teaching, nor
do they practice in line with the teaching. That's how a person has
learned much but hasn\'t got the point of learning.

And how has a person learned much and has got the point of learning?
It's when a person has learned much of the statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And with the large amount
they've learned, they understand the meaning and the teaching, and they
practice in line with the teaching. That's how a person has learned much
and has got the point of learning.

These are the four people found in the world.

> If you don't learn much,\
> and aren't steady in ethics,\
> they'll criticize you on both counts,\
> for your ethics and your learning.
>
> If you don't learn much,\
> and you are steady in ethics,\
> they'll praise your ethical conduct,\
> since your learning has succeeded.
>
> If you learn much,\
> but aren't steady in ethics,\
> they'll criticize your ethical conduct,\
> for your learning hasn't succeeded.
>
> If you learn much,\
> and you are steady in ethics,\
> they'll praise you on both counts,\
> for your ethics and your learning.
>
> A wise disciple of the Buddha\
> who is learned and has memorized the teachings;\
> like a pendant of Black Plum River gold,\
> who is worthy to criticize them?\
> Even the gods praise them,\
> and by Brahmā, too, they're praised."

</article>
<article id="an4.7">

#### [AN 4.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Beautification ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four who are competent, educated, assured, and
learned, who have memorized the teachings and practice in line with the
teachings, beautify the Saṅgha. What four? A monk, a nun, a layman, and
a laywoman.

These four who are competent, educated, assured, and learned, who have
memorized the teachings and practice in line with the teachings,
beautify the Saṅgha.

> Whoever is competent and assured,\
> learned, a memorizer of the teachings,\
> who lives in line with the teachings---\
> such a person is said to beautify the Saṅgha.
>
> A monk accomplished in ethics,\
> and a learned nun,\
> a faithful layman,\
> and a faithful laywoman, too:\
> these beautify the Saṅgha,\
> they are the beautifiers of the Saṅgha."

</article>
<article id="an4.8">

#### [AN 4.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Self-assured ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vesārajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these
he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel. What four?

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don't understand these
things.' Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and
assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these
defilements.' Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and
assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for
the one who performs them.' Since I see no such reason, I live secure,
fearless, and assured.

I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or
Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying:
'Though you teach that this teaching leads to the goal of the complete
ending of suffering, it doesn't lead there for one who practices it.'
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured.

A Realized One has these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel.

> The various grounds for criticism\
> that ascetics and brahmins rely on\
> vanish on reaching a Realized One,\
> assured, gone beyond grounds for criticism.
>
> He rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma `<j>`{=html}as a consummate one,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> complete, sympathetic for all living creatures.\
> Sentient beings revere him, `<j>`{=html}first among gods and humans,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> who has gone beyond rebirth."

</article>
<article id="an4.9">

#### [AN 4.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Arising of Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhuppādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four things that give rise to craving in a
mendicant. What four? For the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or
rebirth in this or that state.

These are the four things that give rise to craving in a mendicant.

> Craving is a person's partner\
> as they transmigrate on this long journey.\
> They go from this state to another,\
> but don't escape transmigration.
>
> Knowing this drawback---\
> that craving is the cause of suffering---\
> rid of craving, free of grasping,\
> a mendicant would wander mindful."

</article>
<article id="an4.10">

#### [AN 4.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Yokes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four yokes. What four? The yokes of sensual
pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance.

And what is the yoke of sensual pleasures? It's when you don't truly
understand sensual pleasures' origin, ending, gratification, drawback,
and escape. So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst,
passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures linger on inside.
This is called the yoke of sensual pleasures. Such is the yoke of
sensual pleasures.

And what is the yoke of future lives? It's when you don't truly
understand future lives' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape. So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion,
attachment, and craving for continued existence linger on inside. This
is called the yoke of future lives. Such are the yokes of sensual
pleasures and future lives.

And what is the yoke of views? It's when you don't truly understand
views' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. So greed,
relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and
craving for views linger on inside. This is called the yoke of views.
Such are the yokes of sensual pleasures, future lives, and views.

And what is the yoke of ignorance? It's when you don't truly understand
the six fields of contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape, so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact linger
on inside. This is called the yoke of ignorance. Such are the yokes of
sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. These are bad,
unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives,
hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death.
That's why someone yoked to them is called: 'one who has not found
sanctuary from the yoke'.

These are the four yokes.

There are these four kinds of unyoking. What four? Unyoking from sensual
pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance.

And what is unyoking from sensual pleasures? It's when you truly
understand sensual pleasures' origin, ending, gratification, drawback,
and escape. So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst,
passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures don't linger on
inside. This is called unyoking from sensual pleasures. Such is unyoking
from sensual pleasures.

And what is unyoking from future lives? It's when you truly understand
future lives' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. So
greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment,
and craving for continued existence don't linger on inside. This is
called unyoking from future lives. Such is unyoking from sensual
pleasures and future lives.

And what is unyoking from views? It's when you truly understand views'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. So greed,
relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and
craving for views don't linger on inside. This is called unyoking from
views. Such is unyoking from sensual pleasures, future lives, and views.

And what is unyoking from ignorance? It's when you truly understand the
six fields of contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape, so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact don't
linger on inside. This is called unyoking from ignorance. Such is
unyoking from sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance.
These are bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to
future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old
age, and death. That's why someone unyoked from them is called: 'one who
has found sanctuary from the yoke'.

These are the four kinds of unyoking.

> Yoked to both sensual pleasures\
> and the desire to be reborn in a future life;\
> yoked also to views,\
> and governed by ignorance,
>
> sentient beings continue to transmigrate,\
> with ongoing birth and death.\
> But those who fully understand sensual pleasures,\
> and the yoke to all future lives;
>
> with the yoke of views eradicated,\
> and ignorance dispelled,\
> unyoked from all yokes,\
> truly those sages have slipped their yoke."

</article>

[]{#an4-caravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Walking {#an4-caravagga.xhtml_an4-caravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.11">

#### [AN 4.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Walking ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Carasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel
thought while walking. They tolerate it and don't give it up, get rid of
it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. Such a mendicant is said to be 'not
keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
standing ... sitting ... or when lying down while awake. They tolerate
it and don't give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.
Such a mendicant is said to be 'not keen or prudent, always lazy, and
lacking energy' when lying down while awake.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
walking. They don't tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it,
eliminate it, and obliterate it. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen
and prudent, always energetic and determined' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
standing ... sitting ... or when lying down while awake. They don't
tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate
it. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and prudent, always energetic
and determined' when lying down while awake."

> Whether walking or standing,\
> sitting or lying down,\
> if you think a bad thought\
> to do with the lay life,
>
> you're on the wrong path,\
> lost among things that delude.\
> Such a mendicant is incapable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening.
>
> But one who, whether standing or walking,\
> sitting or lying down,\
> has calmed their thoughts,\
> loving peace of mind;\
> such a mendicant is capable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening."

</article>
<article id="an4.12">

#### [AN 4.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've undertaken. When you've done this, what more is there to
do?

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking,
and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and
doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is
established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their
mind is immersed in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and
prudent, always energetic and determined' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing
... sitting ... and when lying down while awake, and has given up
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their
energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and
lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is
immersed in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and prudent,
always energetic and determined' when lying down while awake.

> Carefully walking, carefully standing,\
> carefully sitting, carefully lying;\
> a mendicant carefully bends their limbs,\
> and carefully extends them.
>
> Above, below, all round,\
> as far as the earth extends;\
> they scrutinize the rise and fall\
> of phenomena such as the aggregates.
>
> Training in what leads to serenity of heart,\
> always staying mindful;\
> they call such a mendicant\
> 'always determined'."

</article>
<article id="an4.13">

#### [AN 4.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Padhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. What four?

A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the
mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.

These are the four right efforts.

> By rightly striving, `<j>`{=html}they've crushed Māra's sovereignty;
> `</j>`{=html}\
> unattached, they've gone beyond `<j>`{=html}the peril of birth and
> death. `</j>`{=html}\
> Contented and unstirred, `<j>`{=html}they've vanquished Māra and his
> mount; `</j>`{=html}\
> now they've gone beyond all Namuci's forces, `<j>`{=html}they're
> happy." `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an4.14">

#### [AN 4.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Restraint ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁvarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four efforts. What four? The efforts to
restrain, to give up, to develop, and to preserve.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to restrain? When a mendicant sees a
sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight,
and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. This is called the effort
to restrain.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to give up? It's when a mendicant
doesn't tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that's arisen,
but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. They
don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give
them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is
called the effort to give up.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to develop? It's when a mendicant
develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity,
which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as
letting go. This is called the effort to develop.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to preserve? It's when a mendicant
preserves a meditation subject that's a fine basis of immersion: the
perception of a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a
split open corpse, or a bloated corpse. This is called the effort to
preserve.

These are the four efforts.

> Restraint and giving up,\
> development and preservation:\
> these are the four efforts\
> taught by the kinsman of the Sun.\
> Any mendicant who keenly applies these\
> may attain the ending of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an4.15">

#### [AN 4.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Regarded as Foremost ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four are regarded as foremost. What four? The
foremost in size of incarnation is Rāhu, lord of titans. The foremost
pleasure seeker is King Mandhātā. The foremost in sovereignty is Māra
the Wicked. In this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---a Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is said to be the
best. These are the four regarded as foremost.

> Rāhu is foremost in size of incarnation,\
> Mandhātā in enjoying sensual pleasures,\
> Māra in sovereignty,\
> shining with power and glory.
>
> Above, below, all round,\
> as far as the earth extends;\
> in all the world with its gods,\
> the Buddha is declared foremost."

</article>
<article id="an4.16">

#### [AN 4.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Subtlety ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sokhummasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of subtlety. What four?

A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of form. They don't see any other
subtlety of form that's better or finer than that, nor do they aim for
it.

A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of feeling. They don't see any other
subtlety of feeling that's better or finer than that, nor do they aim
for it.

A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of perception. They don't see any
other subtlety of perception that's better or finer than that, nor do
they aim for it.

A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of choices. They don't see any other
subtlety of choices that's better or finer than that, nor do they aim
for it.

These are the four kinds of subtlety.

> Knowing the subtlety of form,\
> the cause of feelings,\
> where perception comes from,\
> and where it ends;\
> and knowing choices as other,\
> as suffering and as not-self,
>
> that mendicant sees rightly,\
> peaceful, in love with the state of peace.\
> They bear their final body,\
> having vanquished Māra and his mount."

</article>
<article id="an4.17">

#### [AN 4.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Prejudice (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaagatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of making prejudiced decisions.
What four? Making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice. These are the four ways of making prejudiced
decisions.

> If you act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity,\
> your fame fades away,\
> like the moon in the waning fortnight."

</article>
<article id="an4.18">

#### [AN 4.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Prejudice (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaagatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of making unprejudiced decisions.
What four? Making decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice. These are the four ways of making unprejudiced
decisions.

> If you don't act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity,\
> your fame swells,\
> like the moon in the waxing fortnight."

</article>
<article id="an4.19">

#### [AN 4.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Prejudice (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaagatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of making prejudiced decisions.
What four? Making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice. These are the four ways of making prejudiced
decisions.

There are these four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. What four?
Making decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and
cowardice. These are the four ways of making unprejudiced decisions.

> If you act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity,\
> your fame fades away,\
> like the moon in the waning fortnight.
>
> If you don't act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity,\
> your fame swells,\
> like the moon in the waxing fortnight."

</article>
<article id="an4.20">

#### [AN 4.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Meal Designator ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhattuddesakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a meal designator who has four qualities is cast down to
hell. What four? They make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. A meal designator who has these
four qualities is cast down to hell.

A meal designator who has four qualities is raised up to heaven. What
four? They make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice. A meal designator who has these four qualities
is raised up to heaven.

> All those people with unbridled sensuality,\
> unprincipled, with no respect for principle,\
> led astray by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice,\
> are called 'an assembly of the dregs':
>
> that's what was said by the ascetic who knows.\
> And so those praiseworthy true persons,\
> standing on principle, doing nothing wrong,\
> not led astray by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice,\
> are called 'an assembly of the cream':\
> that's what was said by the ascetic who knows."

</article>

[]{#an4-uruvelavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter at Uruvelā {#an4-uruvelavagga.xhtml_an4-uruvelavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.21">

#### [AN 4.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Uruvelā (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamauruvelasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā
River. As I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: 'One
without respect and reverence lives in suffering. What ascetic or
brahmin should I honor and respect and rely on?'

Then it occurred to me: 'I would honor and respect and rely on another
ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the entire spectrum of ethics, if
it were incomplete. But I don't see any other ascetic or brahmin in this
world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---who is more accomplished
than myself in ethics, who I should honor and respect and rely on.

I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as
to complete the entire spectrum of immersion, if it were incomplete. But
I don't see any other ascetic or brahmin ... who is more accomplished
than myself in immersion ...

I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as
to complete the entrie spectrum of wisdom, if it were incomplete. But I
don't see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world ... who is more
accomplished than myself in wisdom ...

I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as
to complete the entire spectrum of freedom, if it were incomplete. But I
don't see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world ... who is more
accomplished than myself in freedom ...'

Then it occurred to me: 'Why don't I honor and respect and rely on the
same teaching to which I was awakened?'

And then Brahmā Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, vanished from
the Brahmā realm and appeared in front of me, as easily as a strong man
would extend or contract his arm. He arranged his robe over one
shoulder, raised his joined palms toward me, and said: 'That's so true,
Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! All the perfected ones, the fully
awakened Buddhas who lived in the past honored and respected and relied
on this same teaching. All the perfected ones, the fully awakened
Buddhas who will live in the future will honor and respect and rely on
this same teaching. May the Blessed One, who is the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha at present, also honor and respect and rely on
this same teaching.'

That's what Brahmā Sahampati said. Then he went on to say:

> 'All Buddhas, whether in the past,\
> the Buddhas of the future,\
> and the Buddha at present---\
> destroyer of the sorrows of many---
>
> respecting the true teaching\
> they did live, they do live,\
> and they also will live.\
> This is the nature of the Buddhas.
>
> Therefore someone who cares for their own welfare,\
> and wants to become the very best they can be,\
> should respect the true teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.'

That's what Brahmā Sahampati said. Then he bowed and respectfully
circled me, keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there.
Then, knowing the request of Brahmā and what was suitable for myself, I
honored and respected and relied on the same teaching to which I was
awakened. And since the Saṅgha has also achieved greatness, I also
respect the Saṅgha."

</article>
<article id="an4.22">

#### [AN 4.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Uruvelā (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyauruvelasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā
River. Then several old brahmins---elderly and senior, who were advanced
in years and had reached the final stage of life---came up to me, and
exchanged greetings with me.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side, and said to me: 'Mister Gotama, we have heard this:

"The ascetic Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior,
who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor
does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat." And this is indeed
the case, for Mister Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and
senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of
life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. This is
not appropriate, Mister Gotama.'

Then it occurred to me, 'These venerables don't know what a senior is,
or what qualities make you a senior.'

Mendicants, suppose you're eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old. But
your speech is untimely, false, meaningless, and against the teaching or
training. You say things at the wrong time which are worthless,
unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial. Then you'll be considered a
'childish senior'.

Now suppose you're a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed
with youth, in the prime of life. But your speech is timely, true,
meaningful, and in line with the teaching and training. You say things
at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial. Then you'll be considered an 'astute senior'.

There are these four qualities that make a senior. What four? A
mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in
the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

These are the four qualities that make a senior.

> The creature with a restless mind\
> speaks a lot of nonsense.\
> Their thoughts are unsettled,\
> and they don't like the true teaching.\
> They're far from seniority, with their bad views\
> and their lack of regard for others.
>
> But one accomplished in ethics,\
> learned and eloquent, that wise one\
> is restrained when experiencing phenomena,\
> discerning the meaning with wisdom.
>
> Gone beyond all things,\
> kind, eloquent,\
> they've given up birth and death,\
> and have completed the spiritual journey.
>
> That's who I call a senior,\
> who has no defilements.\
> With the ending of defilements, a mendicant\
> is declared a 'senior'."

</article>
<article id="an4.23">

#### [AN 4.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The World ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lokasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
is detached from the world. The origin of the world has been understood
by the Realized One; and he has given up the origin of the world. The
cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
has realized the cessation of the world. The practice that leads to the
cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
has developed the practice that leads to the cessation of the world.

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---whatever is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind, all
that has been understood by the Realized One. That's why he's called the
'Realized One'.

From the night when the Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished---in the element
of extinguishment with no residue---everything he speaks, says, and
expresses is real, not otherwise. That's why he's called the 'Realized
One'.

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. Since this is so,
that's why he's called the 'Realized One'.

In this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---the Realized One is the
vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power.
That's why he's called the 'Realized One'.

> Directly knowing the whole world as it is,\
> and everything in it,\
> he is detached from the whole world,\
> disengaged from the whole world.
>
> That wise one is the champion\
> who is released from all ties.\
> He has reached ultimate peace:\
> extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter.
>
> He is the Buddha, with defilements ended,\
> untroubled, with doubts cut off.\
> He has attained the end of all deeds,\
> freed with the end of attachments.
>
> That Blessed One is the Buddha,\
> he is the supreme lion,\
> in all the world with its gods,\
> he turns the divine wheel.
>
> And so those gods and humans,\
> who have gone to the Buddha for refuge,\
> come together and revere him,\
> great of heart and intrepid:
>
> 'Tamed, he is the best of tamers,\
> peaceful, he is the seer among the peaceful,\
> liberated, he is the foremost of liberators,\
> crossed over, he is the most excellent of guides across.'
>
> And so they revere him,\
> great of heart and intrepid.\
> In the world with its gods,\
> he has no rival."

</article>
<article id="an4.24">

#### [AN 4.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kāḷaka's Monastery ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāḷakārāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in Kāḷaka's monastery.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"In this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---whatever is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind: that
I know.

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---whatever is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind: that
I have insight into. That has been known by a Realized One, but a
Realized One is not subject to it.

If I were to say that 'I do not know ... the world with its gods', I
would be lying.

If I were to say that 'I both know and do not know ... the world with
its gods', that would be just the same.

If I were to say that 'I neither know nor do not know ... the world with
its gods', that would be my fault.

So a Realized One sees what is to be seen, but does not conceive what is
seen, does not conceive what is unseen, does not conceive what is to be
seen, and does not conceive a seer. He hears what is to be heard, but
does not conceive what is heard, does not conceive what is unheard, does
not conceive what is to be heard, and does not conceive a hearer. He
thinks what is to be thought, but does not conceive what is thought,
does not conceive what is not thought, does not conceive what is to be
thought, and does not conceive a thinker. He knows what is to be known,
but does not conceive what is known, does not conceive what is unknown,
does not conceive what is to be known, and does not conceive a knower.

Since a Realized One is unaffected in the midst of things able to be
seen, heard, thought, and known, he is the unaffected one. And I say
that there is no better or finer poise than this.

> Such a one does not take anything\
> seen, heard, or thought to be ultimately true or false.\
> But others get attached, thinking it's the truth,\
> limited by their preconceptions.
>
> Since they've seen this dart\
> to which people are attached and cling,\
> saying, 'I know, I see, that's how it is',\
> the Realized Ones have no attachments."

</article>
<article id="an4.25">

#### [AN 4.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Spiritual Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brahmacariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of deceiving
people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or
popularity, nor for the benefit of winning debates, nor thinking, 'So
let people know about me!' This spiritual life is lived for the sake of
restraint, giving up, fading away, and cessation.

> The Buddha taught the spiritual life\
> not because of tradition,\
> but for the sake of restraint and giving up,\
> and because it culminates in extinguishment.\
> This is the path followed by the great souls,\
> the great seers.
>
> Those who practice it\
> as it was taught by the Buddha,\
> doing the teacher's bidding,\
> make an end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an4.26">

#### [AN 4.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deceivers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kuhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who are deceivers and flatterers, pompous
and fake, insolent, and scattered: those mendicants are no followers of
mine. They've left this teaching and training, and they don't achieve
growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

But those mendicants who are genuine, not flatterers, wise, amenable,
and serene: those mendicants are followers of mine. They haven't left
this teaching and training, and they achieve growth, improvement, or
maturity in this teaching and training.

> Those who are deceivers and flatterers, `<j>`{=html}pompous and fake,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> insolent and scattered:\
> these don't grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha.
>
> But those who are genuine, not flatterers, wise,\
> amenable, and serene:\
> these do grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha."

</article>
<article id="an4.27">

#### [AN 4.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Contentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Santuṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four trifles are easy to find and are blameless. What
four? Rag-robes ... A lump of almsfood ... Lodgings at the root of a
tree ... Rancid urine as medicine ...

These four trifles are easy to find and are blameless. When a mendicant
is content with trifles that are easy to find, they have one of the
factors of the ascetic life, I say.

> When you're content with what's blameless,\
> trifling, and easy to find,\
> you don't get upset\
> about lodgings, robes,\
> food, and drink,\
> and you're not obstructed anywhere.
>
> These qualities are said to be\
> integral to the ascetic life.\
> They're mastered by one who trains,\
> content and diligent."

</article>
<article id="an4.28">

#### [AN 4.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Traditions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyavaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four noble traditions are primordial, long-standing,
traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since
the beginning. They're not being corrupted now, nor will they be.
Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them. What four?

Firstly, a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, and praises such
contentment. They don't try to get hold of a robe in an improper way.
They don't get upset if they don't get a robe. And if they do get a
robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback,
and understanding the escape. But they don't glorify themselves or put
others down on account of their contentment. A mendicant who is deft,
tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient,
primordial noble tradition.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of almsfood ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings ...

Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys meditation and loves to meditate. They
enjoy giving up and love to give up. But they don't glorify themselves
or put down others on account of their love for meditation and giving
up. A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in this is
said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble tradition.

These four noble traditions are primordial, long-standing, traditional,
and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the
beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible
ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them.

When a mendicant has these four noble traditions, if they live in the
east they prevail over discontent, and discontent doesn't prevail over
them. If they live in the west ... the north ... the south, they prevail
over discontent, and discontent doesn't prevail over them. Why is that?
Because a wise one prevails over desire and discontent.

> Discontent doesn't prevail over a wise one;\
> for the wise one is not beaten by discontent.\
> A wise one prevails over discontent,\
> for the wise one is a beater of discontent.
>
> Who can hold back the dispeller,\
> who's thrown away all deeds?\
> Like a pendant of Black Plum River gold,\
> who is worthy to criticize them?\
> Even the gods praise them,\
> and by Brahmā, too, they're praised."

</article>
<article id="an4.29">

#### [AN 4.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Footprints of the Dhamma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammapadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial,
long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they
have been since the beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will
they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them. What
four? Contentment, good will, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

These four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing,
traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since
the beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will they be.
Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them.

> You should live with contentment,\
> and a heart of good will,\
> mindful, with unified mind,\
> serene within."

</article>
<article id="an4.30">

#### [AN 4.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wanderers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paribbājakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.

Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the
monastery of the wanderers on the bank of the Sappinī river. They
included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known
wanderers. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat
and went to the wanderer's monastery on the banks of the Sappinī river,
He sat down on the seat spread out, and said to the wanderers:

"Wanderers, these four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial,
long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they
have been since the beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will
they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them. What
four? Contentment ... Good will ... Right mindfulness ... Right
immersion ... These four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial,
long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they
have been since the beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will
they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them.

Wanderers, if someone should say: 'I'll reject this Dhamma footprint of
contentment, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who covets sensual
pleasures with acute lust.' Then I'd say to them: 'Let them come, speak,
and discuss. We'll see how powerful they are.' It is quite impossible to
reject this Dhamma footprint of contentment, and point out a true
ascetic or brahmin who covets sensual pleasures with acute lust.

If someone should say: 'I'll reject this Dhamma footprint of good will,
and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who has ill will and malicious
intent.' Then I'd say to them: 'Let them come, speak, and discuss. We'll
see how powerful they are.' It is quite impossible to reject this Dhamma
footprint of good will, and point out a true ascetic or brahmin who has
ill will and malicious intent.

If someone should say: 'I'll reject this Dhamma footprint of right
mindfulness, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who is unmindful,
with no situational awareness.' Then I'd say to them: 'Let them come,
speak, and discuss. We'll see how powerful they are.' It is quite
impossible to reject this Dhamma footprint of right mindfulness, and
point out a true ascetic or brahmin who is unmindful, with no
situational awareness.

If someone should say: 'I'll reject this Dhamma footprint of right
immersion, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who is scattered, with
straying mind.' Then I'd say to them: 'Let them come, speak, and
discuss. We'll see how powerful they are.' It is quite impossible to
reject this Dhamma footprint of right immersion, and point out a true
ascetic or brahmin who is scattered, with straying mind.

If anyone imagines they can criticize and reject these four footprints
of the Dhamma, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on four legitimate
grounds in the present life. What four?

If you reject the Dhamma footprint of contentment, then you must honor
and praise those ascetics and brahmins who covet sensual pleasures with
acute lust.

If you reject the Dhamma footprint of good will, you must honor and
praise those ascetics and brahmins who have ill will and malicious
intent.

If you reject the Dhamma footprint of right mindfulness, then you must
honor and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are unmindful, with no
situational awareness.

If you reject the Dhamma footprint of right immersion, you must honor
and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are scattered, with straying
minds.

If anyone imagines they can criticize and reject these four footprints
of the Dhamma, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on four legitimate
grounds in the present life.

Even those wanderers of the past, Vassa and Bhañña of Ukkalā, who
adhered to the doctrines of no-cause, inaction, and nihilism, didn't
imagine that these four footprints of the Dhamma should be criticized or
rejected. Why is that? For fear of being blamed, criticized, and
faulted.

> One who has good will, ever mindful,\
> serene within,\
> training to remove desire,\
> is called 'a diligent one'."

</article>

[]{#an4-cakkavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Situations {#an4-cakkavagga.xhtml_an4-cakkavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.31">

#### [AN 4.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Situations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four situations. When these situations come
about, any god or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire
great and abundant wealth. What four? Living in a suitable region,
relying on true persons, being rightly resolved in oneself, and past
merit.

These are the four situations. When these situations come about, any god
or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire great and
abundant wealth.

> When a person lives in a suitable region,\
> making friends with noble ones,\
> possessing right resolve,\
> and having merit from the past,\
> grain, riches, fame, reputation,\
> and happiness come to them."

</article>
<article id="an4.32">

#### [AN 4.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inclusion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of being inclusive. What four?
Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality.

These are the four ways of being inclusive.

> Giving and kindly words,\
> taking care here,\
> and equality in worldly conditions,\
> in each case as they deserve.\
> These ways of being inclusive in the world\
> are like a moving chariot's linchpin.
>
> If there were no such ways of being inclusive,\
> neither mother nor father\
> would be respected and honored\
> for what they've done for their children.
>
> But since these ways of being inclusive do exist,\
> the astute do regard them well,\
> so they achieve greatness\
> and are praised."

</article>
<article id="an4.33">

#### [AN 4.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. And the animals who hear
the roar of the lion, king of beasts, are typically filled with fear,
awe, and terror. They return to their lairs, be they in a hole, the
water, or a wood; and the birds take to the air. Even the royal
elephants, bound with strong harnesses in the villages, towns, and
capital cities, break apart their bonds, and urinate and defecate in
terror as they flee here and there. That's how powerful is the lion,
king of beasts, over animals, how illustrious and mighty.

In the same way, when a Realized One arises in the world---perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed---he teaches the Dhamma: 'Such is
substantial reality, such is the origin of substantial reality, such is
the cessation of substantial reality, such is the practice that leads to
the cessation of substantial reality.'

Now, there are gods who are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy,
lasting long in their divine palaces. When they hear this teaching by
the Realized One, they're typically filled with fear, awe, and terror.
'Oh no! It turns out we're impermanent, though we thought we were
permanent! It turns out we don't last, though we thought we were
everlasting! It turns out we're transient, though we thought we were
eternal! It turns out that we're impermanent, not lasting, transient,
and included within substantial reality.'

That's how powerful is the Realized One in the world with its gods, how
illustrious and mighty.

> The Buddha, the teacher without a peer\
> in all the world with its gods,\
> rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma\
> from his own insight:
>
> substantial reality, its cessation,\
> the origin of substantial reality,\
> and the noble eightfold path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> And then the long-lived gods,\
> so beautiful and famous,\
> are afraid and full of terror,\
> like the other beasts when they hear a lion.
>
> 'We haven't transcended substantial reality!\
> It turns out we're impermanent!'\
> So they say when they hear the word\
> of the perfected one, free and unaffected."

</article>
<article id="an4.34">

#### [AN 4.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Best Kinds of Confidence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggappasādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four kinds of confidence are the best. What four?

The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, is said
to be the best of all sentient beings---be they footless, with two feet,
four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with perception or
without perception or with neither perception nor non-perception. Those
who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence in the best. Having
confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The noble eightfold path is said to be the best of all conditioned
things. Those who have confidence in the noble eightfold path have
confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the
best.

Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or
unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst,
the abolishing of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. Those who have
confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best.
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The Saṅgha of the Realized One's disciples is said to be the best of all
communities and groups. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world. Those who have confidence in the
Saṅgha have confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the
result is the best.

These are the four best kinds of confidence.

> For those who, knowing the best teaching,\
> base their confidence on the best---\
> confident in the best Awakened One,\
> supremely worthy of a religious donation;
>
> confident in the best teaching,\
> the bliss of fading and stilling;\
> confident in the best Saṅgha,\
> the supreme field of merit---
>
> giving gifts to the best,\
> the best of merit grows:\
> the best lifespan, beauty,\
> fame, reputation, happiness, and strength.
>
> An intelligent person gives to the best,\
> settled on the best teaching.\
> When they become a god or human,\
> they rejoice at reaching the best."

</article>
<article id="an4.35">

#### [AN 4.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vassakāra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vassakārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove,
the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a minister of
Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side
and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, when someone has four qualities we describe him as a
great man with great wisdom. What four?

They are very learned in diverse fields of learning.

They understand the meaning of diverse statements, saying: 'This is what
that statement means; that is what this statement means.'

They are mindful, able to remember and recollect what was said and done
long ago.

They are deft and tireless in household duties, understanding how to go
about things in order to complete and organize the work.

When someone has these four qualities we describe him as a great man
with great wisdom. If Mister Gotama agrees with me, please say so. If he
disagrees, please say so."

"Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, but when someone has
four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom. What
four?

It's when someone practices for the welfare and happiness of the people.
They've established many people in the noble system, that is, the
principles of goodness and skillfulness.

They think what they want to think, and don't think what they don't want
to think. They consider what they want to consider, and don't consider
what they don't want to consider. Thus they have achieved mental mastery
of the paths of thought.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, but when someone has
these four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! How well said this was by
Mister Gotama! And we will remember Mister Gotama as someone who has
these four qualities. For Mister Gotama practices for the welfare and
happiness of the people ... Mister Gotama has achieved mental mastery of
the paths of thought. Mister Gotama gets the four absorptions ... when
he wants, without trouble or difficulty. Mister Gotama has realized the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. He
lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of
defilements."

"Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. Nevertheless, I
will answer you. For I do practice for the welfare and happiness of the
people ... I have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. I do
get the four absorptions ... when I want, without trouble or difficulty.
I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. I live having realized it with my own insight due to the
ending of defilements.

> He discovered release from the snare of death\
> for all beings,\
> and explained the system of the teaching\
> for the welfare of gods and humans.\
> When they see him or hear him,\
> many people become confident.
>
> He is skilled in what is the path `<j>`{=html}and what is not the
> path, `</j>`{=html}\
> he has completed the task `<j>`{=html}and is free of defilements.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> The Buddha, bearing his final body,\
> is called 'a great man, of great wisdom'."

</article>
<article id="an4.36">

#### [AN 4.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Doṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Doṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Ukkaṭṭhā and
Setavyā, as was the brahmin Doṇa.

Doṇa saw that the Buddha's footprints had thousand-spoked wheels, with
rims and hubs, complete in every detail. It occurred to him, "Oh, how
incredible, how amazing! Surely these couldn't be the footprints of a
human being?"

The Buddha had left the road and sat at the root of a tree cross-legged,
setting his body straight, and establishing mindfulness in his presence.

Then Doṇa, following the Buddha's footprints, saw him sitting at the
tree root---impressive and inspiring, with peaceful faculties and mind,
attained to the highest self-control and serenity, like an elephant with
tamed, guarded, and controlled faculties. He went up to the Buddha and
said to him:

"Sir, might you be a god?"

"I will not be a god, brahmin."

"Might you be a centaur?"

"I will not be a centaur."

"Might you be a native spirit?"

"I will not be a native spirit."

"Might you be a human?"

"I will not be a human."

"When asked whether you might be a god, centaur, native spirit, or
human, you answer that you will not be any of these. What then might you
be?"

"Brahmin, if I had not given up defilements I might have become a god
... a centaur ... a native spirit ... or a human. But I have given up
those defilements, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm
stump, obliterated them so they are unable to arise in the future.

Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it
sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and
stand with no water clinging to it. In the same way, though I was born
and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, unsullied by
the world.

Remember me, brahmin, as a Buddha.

> I could have been reborn as a god,\
> or as a centaur flying through the sky.\
> I could have become a native spirit,\
> or returned as a human.\
> But I've ended those defilements,\
> they're blown away and mown down.
>
> Like a graceful lotus,\
> to which water does not cling,\
> the world doesn't cling to me,\
> and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha."

</article>
<article id="an4.37">

#### [AN 4.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparihāniyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has four qualities can't decline, and has
drawn near to extinguishment. What four? A mendicant is accomplished in
ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to
wakefulness.

And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault,
they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
accomplished in ethics.

And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? When a mendicant sees a
sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight,
and achieving restraint over it. Hearing a sound with their ears ...
Smelling an odor with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue
... Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they
practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving
restraint over it. That's how a mendicant guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? It's when a mendicant
reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' That's
how a mendicant eats in moderation.

And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? It's when a mendicant
practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind
from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle watch, they lie
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.
In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and
sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. This is how a
mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness. A mendicant who has these four
qualities can't decline, and has drawn near to extinguishment.

> Established in ethics,\
> restrained in the sense faculties,\
> eating in moderation,\
> and dedicated to wakefulness;
>
> a mendicant lives like this, with keen energy,\
> tireless all night and day,\
> developing skillful qualities,\
> for the sake of finding sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> A mendicant who loves to be diligent,\
> seeing fear in negligence,\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an4.38">

#### [AN 4.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Withdrawn ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Patilīnasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical
process, and is said to be 'withdrawn'.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. For example: the cosmos is eternal, or not
eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same
thing, or they are different things; after death, a realized one still
exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists,
or neither still exists nor no longer exists. A mendicant has dispelled,
eliminated, thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished
all these. That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant withdrawn? It's when they've given up the conceit
'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated
it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant is
withdrawn. A mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical
process, and is said to be 'withdrawn'.

> The search for sensual pleasures, for a good rebirth,\
> and the search for a spiritual path;\
> the holding tight to the thought, 'this is the truth',\
> and the mass of grounds for views---
>
> for one detached from all lusts,\
> freed by the ending of craving,\
> that searching has been relinquished,\
> and those viewpoints eradicated.
>
> That mendicant is peaceful and mindful,\
> a tranquil champion.\
> And when they're awakened `<j>`{=html}by comprehending conceit,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> they're called 'withdrawn'."

</article>
<article id="an4.39">

#### [AN 4.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ujjaya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ujjayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Ujjaya the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Does Mister Gotama praise sacrifice?"

"Brahmin, I don't praise all sacrifices. Nor do I criticize all
sacrifices. Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep,
chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. I
criticize that kind of violent sacrifice. Why is that? Because neither
perfected ones nor those who are on the path to perfection will attend
such a violent sacrifice.

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens
and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. I praise
that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an
ongoing family sacrifice. Why is that? Because perfected ones and those
who are on the path to perfection will attend such a non-violent
sacrifice.

> Horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,\
> the sacrifices of the 'casting of the yoke-pin',\
> the 'royal soma drinking', and the 'unbarred'---\
> these huge violent sacrifices yield no great fruit.
>
> The great sages of right comportment\
> don't attend sacrifices\
> where goats, sheep, and cattle,\
> and various creatures are killed.
>
> But the great sages of right comportment\
> do attend non-violent sacrifices\
> of regular family tradition,\
> where goats, sheep, and cattle,\
> and various creatures aren't killed.
>
> An intelligent person should sacrifice like this,\
> for this sacrifice is very fruitful.\
> For a sponsor of sacrifices like this,\
> things get better, not worse.\
> Such a sacrifice is truly abundant,\
> and even the deities are pleased."

</article>
<article id="an4.40">

#### [AN 4.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Udāyī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udāyīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Udāyī the brahmin went up to the Buddha, ... and asked him, "Does
Mister Gotama praise sacrifice?"

"Brahmin, I don't praise all sacrifices. Nor do I criticize all
sacrifices. ... Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and
sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of animals are slaughtered.
I don't praise that kind of violent sacrifice.

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens
and pigs, and various kinds of animals are not slaughtered. I do praise
that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an
ongoing family sacrifice.

> The kind of sacrifice that's allowable and timely,\
> well prepared and non-violent,\
> is attended by\
> disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> The Buddhas---`<j>`{=html}who have drawn back the veil from the world,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> transcending time and rebirth---\
> praise this sacrifice,\
> as they are expert in sacrifice.
>
> When you've prepared a suitable offering,\
> whether as sacrifice or for ancestors,\
> sacrifice it with confident heart,\
> in the fertile field of spiritual practitioners.
>
> When it's well-gotten, well-offered, `<j>`{=html}and well-sacrificed,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> to those worthy of a religious donation,\
> a sacrifice is truly abundant,\
> and even the deities are pleased.
>
> When an intelligent, faithful person,\
> sacrifices like this, with a mind of letting go,\
> that astute one is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

</article>

[]{#an4-rohitassavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Rohitassa {#an4-rohitassavagga.xhtml_an4-rohitassavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.41">

#### [AN 4.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ways of Developing Immersion Further ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samādhibhāvanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of developing immersion further.
What four? There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to
blissful meditation in the present life. There is a way of developing
immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision. There is a
way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and
awareness. There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to
the ending of defilements.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
blissful meditation in the present life? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is the way of developing
immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in the present life.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision? It's when a mendicant applies their mind
to the perception of light, focusing on the perception of day: as by
day, so by night; as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and
unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of radiance. This is
the way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge
and vision.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
mindfulness and awareness? It's when a mendicant knows feelings as they
arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know perceptions as
they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as
they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. This is the way of
developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the
ending of defilements? It's when a mendicant meditates observing rise
and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the
origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is feeling, such is the
origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception,
such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. Such
are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of
choices. Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness,
such is the ending of consciousness.' This is the way of developing
immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements.

These are the four ways of developing immersion further. And it was in
this connection that I said in 'The Way to the Far Shore', in 'The
Questions of Puṇṇaka':

> 'Having appraised the world high and low,\
> there is nothing in the world that disturbs them.\
> Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, `<j>`{=html}with no need for hope,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> they've crossed over rebirth and old age, I declare.'"

</article>
<article id="an4.42">

#### [AN 4.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ways of Answering Questions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañhabyākaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of answering questions. What
four? There is a question that should be answered categorically. There
is a question that should be answered analytically. There is a question
that should be answered with a counter-question. There is a question
that should be set aside.

These are the four ways of answering questions.

> One is stated categorically,\
> another analytically,\
> a third with a counter-question,\
> while a fourth is set aside.
>
> A mendicant who knows each of these,\
> in line with good principles,\
> is said to be skilled\
> in the four kinds of questions.
>
> They're intimidating, hard to defeat,\
> deep, and hard to crush.\
> They're expert in both\
> what the meaning is and what it isn't.
>
> Rejecting what is not the meaning,\
> an astute person grasps the meaning.\
> A wise one, comprehending the meaning,\
> is said to be astute."

</article>
<article id="an4.43">

#### [AN 4.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Valuing Anger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakodhagarusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? People
who value anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor rather
than the true teaching. These are the four people found in the world.

These four people are found in the world. What four? People who value
the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material things,
or honor. These are the four people found in the world.

> Mendicants who value anger and denigration,\
> possessions and honor,\
> don't grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha.
>
> But those who value the true teaching,\
> who have lived it, and are living it now,\
> these do grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha."

</article>
<article id="an4.44">

#### [AN 4.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Valuing Anger (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakodhagarusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things oppose the true teaching. What four?
Valuing anger, denigration, material things, and honor rather than the
true teaching. These are the four things that oppose the true teaching.

These four things are the true teaching. What four? Valuing the true
teaching rather than anger, denigration, material things, and honor.
These are the four things that are the true teaching.

> A mendicant who values anger and denigration,\
> possessions and honor,\
> doesn't grow in the true teaching,\
> like a rotten seed in a good field.
>
> But those who value the true teaching,\
> who have lived it, and are living it now,\
> these do grow in the teaching,\
> like well-watered herbs."

</article>
<article id="an4.45">

#### [AN 4.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Rohitassa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rohitassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Rohitassa, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said
to him:

"Sir, is it possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by
traveling to a place where there's no being born, growing old, dying,
passing away, or being reborn?"

"Reverend, I say it's not possible to know or see or reach the end of
the world by traveling to a place where there's no being born, growing
old, dying, passing away, or being reborn."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how well said this was by the
Buddha.

Once upon a time, I was a seer called Rohitassa of the Bhoja people. I
was a sky-walker with psychic powers. I was as fast as a light arrow
easily shot across the shadow of a palm tree by a well-trained expert
archer with a strong bow. My stride was such that it could span from the
eastern ocean to the western ocean. Having such speed and stride, this
wish came to me: 'I will reach the end of the world by traveling.' I
traveled for my whole lifespan of a hundred years---pausing only to eat
and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness---and I
passed away along the way, never reaching the end of the world.

It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how well said this was by the
Buddha."

"Reverend, I say it's not possible to know or see or reach the end of
the world by traveling to a place where there's no being born, growing
old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. But I also say there's no
making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world. For it
is in this fathom-long carcass with its perception and mind that I
describe the world, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that
leads to its cessation.

> The end of the world can never\
> be reached by traveling.\
> But without reaching the end of the world,\
> there's no release from suffering.
>
> So an intelligent person, understanding the world,\
> has completed the spiritual journey, `<j>`{=html}and gone to the end
> of the world. `</j>`{=html}\
> A calm one, knowing the end of the world,\
> does not long for this world or the next."

</article>
<article id="an4.46">

#### [AN 4.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Rohitassa (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyarohitassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Tonight, the glorious god Rohitassa, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, came to me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, is it
possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a
place where there's no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or
being reborn?' ...

*(The rest is the same as the previous discourse, AN 4.45.)*

</article>
<article id="an4.47">

#### [AN 4.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Very Far Apart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Suvidūrasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are very far apart. What four? The
firmament and the earth. ... The near and the far shore of the ocean.
... Where the sun rises and where it sets. ... The teaching of the
virtuous and the teaching of the wicked. ... These are the four things
very far apart.

> The firmament is far from the earth;\
> they say the other shore of the ocean is far;\
> and where the sun rises is far\
> from where that beacon sets.\
> But even further apart than that, they say,\
> is the teaching of the virtuous from the wicked.
>
> The company of the virtuous is reliable;\
> as long as it remains, it stays the same.\
> But the company of the wicked is fickle,\
> and so the teaching of the virtuous `<j>`{=html}is far from the
> wicked." `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an4.48">

#### [AN 4.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Visākha, Pañcāli's Son ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Visākhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli's son, was educating,
encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly
hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate,
expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants, who was educating, encouraging, firing up, and
inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk?"

"Sir, it was Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli's son."

Then the Buddha said to Visākha, "Good, good, Visākha! It's good that
you educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the mendicants in the
assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with words that are polished, clear,
articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.

> Though an astute person is mixed up with fools,\
> they don't know unless he speaks.\
> But when he speaks they know,\
> he's teaching the state free of death.
>
> He should speak and illustrate the teaching,\
> holding up the banner of the seers.\
> Words well spoken are the seers' banner,\
> for the teaching is the banner of the seers."

</article>
<article id="an4.49">

#### [AN 4.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perversions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vipallāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four perversions of perception, mind, and
view. What four?

1.  Taking impermanence as permanence.
2.  Taking suffering as happiness.
3.  Taking not-self as self.
4.  Taking ugliness as beauty.

These are the four perversions of perception, mind, and view.

There are these four corrections of perception, mind, and view. What
four?

1.  Taking impermanence as impermanence.
2.  Taking suffering as suffering.
3.  Taking not-self as not-self.
4.  Taking ugliness as ugliness.

These are the four corrections of perception, mind, and view.

> Perceiving impermanence as permanence,\
> suffering as happiness,\
> not-self as self,\
> and ugliness as beauty---\
> sentient beings are ruined by wrong view,\
> deranged, out of their minds.
>
> Yoked by Māra's yoke, these people\
> find no sanctuary from the yoke.\
> Sentient beings continue to transmigrate,\
> with ongoing birth and death.
>
> But when the Buddhas arise\
> in the world, those beacons\
> reveal this teaching,\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> When a wise person hears them,\
> they get their mind back.\
> Seeing impermanence as impermanence,\
> suffering as suffering,
>
> not-self as not-self,\
> and ugliness as ugliness---\
> taking up right view,\
> they've risen above all suffering."

</article>
<article id="an4.50">

#### [AN 4.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Corruptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upakkilesasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four corruptions obscure the sun and moon, so they
don't shine and glow and radiate. What four? Clouds ... Fog ... Smoke
... An eclipse of Rāhu, lord of titans ... These are four corruptions
that obscure the sun and moon, so they don't shine and glow and radiate.

In the same way, these four things corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so
they don't shine and glow and radiate. What four?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who drink liquor, not avoiding
drinking liquor. This is the first thing that corrupts ascetics and
brahmins ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have sex, not avoiding sex.
This is the second thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who accept gold and currency, not
avoiding receiving gold and currency. This is the third thing that
corrupts ascetics and brahmins ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who make a living the wrong way,
not avoiding wrong livelihood. This is the fourth thing that corrupts
ascetics and brahmins ...

These are four things that corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so they don't
shine and glow and radiate.

> Some ascetics and brahmins\
> are plagued by greed and hate;\
> men shrouded by ignorance,\
> enjoying things that seem pleasant.
>
> Drinking liquor,\
> having sex,\
> accepting money and gold:\
> they're ignorant.\
> Some ascetics and brahmins\
> make a living the wrong way.
>
> These corruptions were spoken of\
> by the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun.\
> When corrupted by these,\
> some ascetics and brahmins\
> don't shine or glow.\
> Impure, dirty creatures,
>
> shrouded in darkness,\
> bondservants of craving, full of attachments,\
> swell the horrors of the charnel ground,\
> taking up future lives."

</article>

[]{#an4-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an4-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an4-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Overflowing Merit {#an4-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an4-punnabhisandavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.51">

#### [AN 4.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overflowing Merit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapuññābhisandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to
heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. What four?

When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart
while using a robe, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless
...

When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart
while eating almsfood, the overflowing of merit for the donor is
limitless ...

When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart
while using lodgings, the overflowing of merit for the donor is
limitless ...

When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart
while using medicines and supplies for the sick, the overflowing of
merit for the donor is limitless ...

These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness.
They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to grasp how much merit they have by saying that
this is the extent of their overflowing merit ... that leads to
happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great
mass of merit.

It's like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It's not easy
to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of
thousands of gallons there are. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of water.

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of
overflowing merit it's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable,
great mass of merit.

> Hosts of people use the rivers,\
> and though the rivers are many,\
> all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,\
> the cruel sea that's home to precious gems.
>
> In the same way, when a person gives `<j>`{=html}food, drink, and
> clothes; `</j>`{=html}\
> and they're a giver of beds, seats, and mats---\
> the streams of merit reach that astute person,\
> as the rivers bring their waters to the sea."

</article>
<article id="an4.52">

#### [AN 4.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overflowing Merit (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapuññābhisandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to
heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. What four?

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
This is the first kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' This is the second
kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha:
'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good,
direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' This is the third kind of
overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This is the
fourth kind of overflowing merit ...

These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness.
They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

> Whoever has faith in the Realized One,\
> unwavering and well grounded;\
> whose ethical conduct is good,\
> praised and loved by the noble ones;
>
> who has confidence in the Saṅgha,\
> and correct view:\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an4.53">

#### [AN 4.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living Together (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaṁvāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Madhurā and
Verañjā, as were several householders, both women and men. The Buddha
left the road and sat at the root of a tree, where the householders saw
him.

They went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha
said to them:

"Householders, there are four ways of living together. What four?

1.  A male zombie living with a female zombie;
2.  a male zombie living with a goddess;
3.  a god living with a female zombie;
4.  a god living with a goddess.

And how does a male zombie live with a female zombie? It's when the
husband kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies,
and uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. He's unethical, of bad
character, living at home with his heart full of the stain of
stinginess, abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. And the wife is
also ... unethical, of bad character ... That's how a male zombie lives
with a female zombie.

And how does a male zombie live with a goddess? It's when the husband
... is unethical, of bad character ... But the wife doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks
that cause negligence. She's ethical, of good character, living at home
with her heart rid of the stain of stinginess, not abusing and insulting
ascetics and brahmins. That's how a male zombie lives with a goddess.

And how does a god live with a female zombie? It's when the husband ...
is ethical, of good character ... But the wife ... is unethical, of bad
character ... That's how a god lives with a female zombie.

And how does a god live with a goddess? It's when the husband ... is
ethical, of good character ... And the wife is also ... ethical, of good
character ... That's how a god lives with a goddess.

These are the four ways of living together.

> When both are unethical,\
> miserly and abusive,\
> then wife and husband\
> live together as zombies.
>
> When the husband is unethical,\
> miserly and abusive,\
> but the wife is ethical,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> she's a goddess living\
> with a zombie for a husband.
>
> When the husband is ethical,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> but the wife is unethical,\
> miserly and abusive,\
> she's a zombie living\
> with a god for a husband.
>
> When both are faithful and bountiful,\
> disciplined, living righteously,\
> then wife and husband\
> say nice things to each other.
>
> They get all the things they need,\
> so they live at ease.\
> Their enemies are downhearted,\
> when both are equal in ethics.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> both equal in precepts and observances,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

</article>
<article id="an4.54">

#### [AN 4.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living Together (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaṁvāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of living together. What four?

1.  A male zombie living with a female zombie;
2.  a male zombie living with a goddess;
3.  a god living with a female zombie;
4.  a god living with a goddess.

And how does a male zombie live with a female zombie? It's when the
husband kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct; he
uses speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and he's
covetous, malicious, and has wrong view. He's unethical, of bad
character, living at home with his heart full of the stain of
stinginess, abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. And the wife is
also ... unethical, of bad character ... That's how a male zombie lives
with a female zombie.

And how does a male zombie live with a goddess? It's when the husband
... is unethical, of bad character ... But the wife doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks
that cause negligence. She doesn't use speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical. And she's contented, kind-hearted, with right
view. She's ethical, of good character, living at home with her heart
rid of the stain of stinginess, not abusing and insulting ascetics and
brahmins. That's how a male zombie lives with a goddess.

And how does a god live with a female zombie? It's when the husband ...
is ethical, of good character ... But the wife ... is unethical, of bad
character ... That's how a god lives with a female zombie.

And how does a god live with a goddess? It's when the husband ... is
ethical, of good character ... And the wife is also ... ethical, of good
character ... That's how a god lives with a goddess.

These are the four ways of living together." ...

</article>
<article id="an4.55">

#### [AN 4.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Equality (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasamajīvīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of the householder Nakula's father, where he sat on the
seat spread out.

Then the householder Nakula's father and the housewife Nakula's mother
went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Nakula's father
said to the Buddha, "Sir, ever since we were both young, and Nakula's
mother was given to me in marriage, I can't recall betraying her even in
thought, still less in deed. We want to see each other in both this life
and the next."

Then Nakula's mother said to the Buddha, "Sir, ever since we were both
young, and I was given in marriage to Nakula's father, I can't recall
betraying him even in thought, still less in deed. We want to see each
other in both this life and the next."

"Householders, if wife and husband want to see each other in both this
life and the next, they should be equals in faith, ethics, generosity,
and wisdom.

> When both are faithful and bountiful,\
> disciplined, living righteously,\
> then wife and husband\
> say nice things to each other.
>
> They get all the things they need,\
> so they live at ease.\
> Their enemies are downhearted,\
> when both are equal in ethics.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> both equal in precepts and observances,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

</article>
<article id="an4.56">

#### [AN 4.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Equality (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasamajīvīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if wife and husband want to see each other in both this
life and the next, they should be equals in faith, ethics, generosity,
and wisdom. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.57">

#### [AN 4.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suppavāsā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Suppavāsāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where
they have a town named Pajjanika.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of Suppavāsā the Koliyan, where he sat on the seat
spread out. Then Suppavāsā served and satisfied the Buddha with her own
hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. When the Buddha had eaten
and washed his hand and bowl, she sat down to one side. The Buddha said
to her:

"Suppavāsā, when a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients
four things. What four? Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength.
Giving long life, she has long life as a god or human. Giving beauty,
she has beauty as a god or human. Giving happiness, she has happiness as
a god or human. Giving strength, she has strength as a god or human.
When a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients these four
things.

> When she gives well-prepared food,\
> pure, fine, and full of flavor,\
> that offering---given to the upright,\
> who have good conduct, and are big-hearted---\
> joins merit to merit. It's very fruitful,\
> and is praised by those who know the world.
>
> Those who recall such sacrifices,\
> live in the world full of inspiration.\
> They've driven out the stain of stinginess, `<j>`{=html}root and all,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

</article>
<article id="an4.58">

#### [AN 4.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sudatta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sudattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple gives food, they give the recipients
four things. What four? Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength.
Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human. ... Giving
beauty ... happiness ... strength ... When a noble disciple gives food,
they give the recipients these four things.

> Carefully giving food at the right time,\
> to those who are disciplined, `<j>`{=html}eating only what others
> give, `</j>`{=html}\
> you provide them with four things:\
> long life, beauty, happiness, and strength.
>
> A person who gives long life, beauty,\
> happiness, and strength,\
> has long life and fame\
> wherever they're reborn."

</article>
<article id="an4.59">

#### [AN 4.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Food ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a donor gives food, they give the recipients four
things. What four? Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.60">

#### [AN 4.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lay Practice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gihisāmīcisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple does four things they are practicing
appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven.
What four? It's when a noble disciple serves the mendicant Saṅgha with
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. When
a noble disciple does these four things they are practicing
appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven.

> Those who are astute practice the way\
> that's appropriate for laypeople.\
> They provide those who are ethical\
> and rightly comported with robes,
>
> almsfood, lodgings,\
> and supplies for the sick.\
> Their merit always grows\
> by day and by night.\
> They pass on to a place in heaven,\
> having done excellent deeds."

</article>

[]{#an4-pattakammavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Deeds of Substance {#an4-pattakammavagga.xhtml_an4-pattakammavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.61">

#### [AN 4.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fitting Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pattakammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, these four things, which are likable, desirable, and
agreeable are hard to get in the world. What four? The first thing is
the wish: 'May wealth come to me by legitimate means!'

The second thing, having got wealth by legitimate means, is the wish:
'May fame come to me, together with my family and teachers.'

The third thing, having got wealth and fame, is the wish: 'May I live
long, keeping alive for a long time!'

The fourth thing, having got wealth, fame, and long life, is the wish:
'When my body breaks up, after death, may I be reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm!' These are the four things, which are likable,
desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world.

These next four things lead to the getting of those four things. What
four? Accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.

And what is accomplishment in faith? It's when a noble disciple has
faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called accomplishment in
faith.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when a noble disciple doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in generosity? It's when a noble disciple
lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share. This is called accomplishment in generosity.

And what is accomplishment in wisdom? When your heart is mastered by
covetousness and immoral greed, you do what you shouldn't, and fail to
do what you should. Your fame and happiness fall to dust. When your
heart is mastered by ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ...
restlessness and remorse ... doubt, you do what you shouldn't, and fail
to do what you should. Your fame and happiness fall to dust.

Knowing that 'covetousness and immoral greed are corruptions of the
mind', that noble disciple gives them up. Knowing that 'ill will ...'
... 'dullness and drowsiness ...' ... 'restlessness and remorse ...' ...
'doubt is a corruption of the mind', that noble disciple gives it up.

When a noble disciple has given up these things, they're called 'a noble
disciple of great wisdom, of widespread wisdom, who sees what matters,
and is accomplished in wisdom'. This is called accomplishment in wisdom.
These are the four things that lead to the getting of the four things,
which are likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the
world.

There are four fitting deeds that a noble disciple does with the
legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up
with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. What four?

To start with, with his legitimate wealth he makes himself happy and
pleased, keeping himself properly happy. He makes his mother and father
happy ... He makes his children, partners, bondservants, workers, and
staff happy ... He makes his friends and colleagues happy ... This is
his first expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting
cause.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he defends himself against
threats from such things as fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved
heirs. He keeps himself safe. This is his second expenditure in an
appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings:
to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. This is his third
expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting
religious donation for ascetics and brahmins---those who avoid
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves---that's conducive to heaven,
ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. This is his fourth expenditure
in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause.

\'These are the four fitting deeds that a noble disciple does with the
legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up
with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow.

Whatever wealth is spent on something other than these four fitting
deeds is said to not be expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a
deserved and fitting cause. But whatever wealth is spent on these four
fitting deeds is said to be expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a
deserved and fitting cause.

> 'I've enjoyed my wealth, `<j>`{=html}supporting those who depend on
> me; `</j>`{=html}\
> I've overcome losses;\
> I've given uplifting religious donations;\
> and made the five spirit-offerings.\
> I have served the ethical and\
> disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> I've achieved the purpose\
> for which an astute lay person\
> wishes to gain wealth.\
> I don't regret what I've done.'
>
> A mortal person who recollects this\
> stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones.\
> They're praised in this life,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.62">

#### [AN 4.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Debtlessness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānaṇyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, these four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson
who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion. What four?
The happiness of ownership, using wealth, debtlessness, and
blamelessness.

And what is the happiness of ownership? It's when a gentleman owns
legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative,
built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. When he
reflects on this, he's filled with pleasure and happiness. This is
called 'the happiness of ownership'.

And what is the happiness of using wealth? It's when a gentleman uses
his legitimate wealth, and makes merit with it. When he reflects on
this, he's filled with pleasure and happiness. This is called 'the
happiness of using wealth'.

And what is the happiness of debtlessness? It's when a gentleman owes no
debt, large or small, to anyone. When he reflects on this, he's filled
with pleasure and happiness. This is called 'the happiness of
debtlessness'.

And what is the happiness of blamelessness? It's when a noble disciple
has blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. When he reflects
on this, he's filled with pleasure and happiness. This is called 'the
happiness of blamelessness'.

These four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson who enjoys
sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion.

> Knowing the happiness of debtlessness,\
> and the extra happiness of possession,\
> a mortal enjoying the happiness of using wealth,\
> then discerns clearly with wisdom.
>
> Discerning clearly, a clever person knows\
> both kinds of happiness:\
> the other kind is not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the happiness of blamelessness."

</article>
<article id="an4.63">

#### [AN 4.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living with Brahmā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brahmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their
home is said to live with Brahmā. A family where the children honor
their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors. A
family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to
live with the old deities. A family where the children honor their
parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods.

'Brahmā' is a term for your parents.

'First tutors' is a term for your parents.

'Old deities' is a term for your parents.

'Worthy of an offering dedicated to the gods' is a term for your
parents.

Why is that? Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise
them, nurture them, and show them the world.

> Parents are said to be 'Brahmā'\
> and 'first tutors'.\
> They're worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods `<j>`{=html}from
> their children, `</j>`{=html}\
> for they love their offspring.
>
> Therefore an astute person\
> would revere them and honor them\
> with food and drink,\
> clothes and bedding,\
> by anointing and bathing,\
> and by washing their feet.
>
> Because they look after\
> their parents like this,\
> they're praised in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.64">

#### [AN 4.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hell ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nirayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and
lie. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

> Killing, stealing,\
> telling lies,\
> and visiting others' wives:\
> astute people don't praise these things."

</article>
<article id="an4.65">

#### [AN 4.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Appearance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rūpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? There
are those whose estimation of and confidence in others is based on
appearance, on eloquence, on mortification, and on principle.

These are the four people found in the world.

> Those who judge on appearance,\
> and those swayed by a voice,\
> are full of desire and greed;\
> those people just don't understand.
>
> Not knowing what's inside,\
> nor seeing what's outside,\
> the fool shut in on every side,\
> gets carried away by a voice.
>
> Not knowing what's inside,\
> but discerning what's outside,\
> seeing the fruit outside,\
> they're also carried away by a voice.
>
> Understanding what's inside,\
> and discerning what's outside,\
> seeing without hindrances,\
> they don't get carried away by a voice."

</article>
<article id="an4.66">

#### [AN 4.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greedy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sarāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
greedy, the hateful, the delusional, and the conceited.

These are the four people found in the world.

> Full of desire for desirable things,\
> enjoying things that seem pleasant,\
> beings veiled by delusion\
> only tighten their bonds.
>
> Born of greed, born of hate,\
> born of delusion: the ignorant\
> do unskillful deeds\
> that afflict and produce pain.
>
> If you act out of these qualities, `<j>`{=html}that's what you become.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> But men shrouded by ignorance,\
> are blind, with no eyes to see,\
> and they never imagine that this could be so."

</article>
<article id="an4.67">

#### [AN 4.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Snake King ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ahirājasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now, at that time a monk in Sāvatthī passed away due to a snake bite.
Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, a monk in Sāvatthī has passed away due to a
snake bite."

"Mendicants, that monk mustn't have spread a mind of love to the four
royal snake families. If he had, he wouldn't have died due to a snake
bite.

What four? The royal snake families of Virūpakkha, Erāpatha,
Chabyāputta, and Kaṇhāgotamaka. ...

Mendicants, I urge you to spread a mind of love to the four royal snake
families, for your own safety, security, and protection.

> I love the Virūpakkhas,\
> the Erāpathas I love,\
> I love the Chabyāputtas,\
> the Kaṇhāgotamakas I love.
>
> I love the footless creatures,\
> the two-footed I love,\
> I love the four-footed,\
> the many-footed I love.
>
> May the footless not harm me!\
> May I not be harmed by the two-footed!\
> May the four-footed not harm me!\
> May I not be harmed by the many-footed!
>
> All sentient beings, all living things,\
> all creatures, every one:\
> may they see only nice things,\
> may bad not come to anyone.
>
> The Buddha is immeasurable,\
> the teaching is immeasurable,\
> the Saṅgha is immeasurable.\
> But limited are crawling things,
>
> snakes and scorpions, centipedes,\
> spiders and lizards and mice.\
> I've made this safeguard, I've made this protection:\
> go away, creatures!\
> And so I revere the Blessed One,\
> I revere the seven perfectly awakened Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an4.68">

#### [AN 4.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Devadatta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. There the Buddha spoke to
the mendicants about Devadatta:

"Possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta for his own ruin
and downfall.

It's like a banana tree, or a bamboo, or a reed, all of which bear fruit
to their own ruin and downfall ...

It's like a mule, which becomes pregnant to its own ruin and downfall.
In the same way, possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta
for his own ruin and downfall.

> The banana tree is destroyed by its own fruit,\
> as are the bamboo and the reed.\
> Honor destroys a sinner,\
> as pregnancy destroys a mule."

</article>
<article id="an4.69">

#### [AN 4.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Padhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four efforts. What four? The efforts to
restrain, to give up, to develop, and to preserve.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to restrain? It's when you generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. This is called the effort to restrain.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to give up? It's when you generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad,
unskillful qualities are given up. This is called the effort to give up.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to develop? It's when you generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that
skillful qualities arise. This is called the effort to develop.

And what, mendicants, is the effort to preserve? It's when you generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that
skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase,
mature, and are fulfilled by development. This is called the effort to
preserve.

These are the four efforts.

> Restraint and giving up,\
> development and preservation:\
> these are the four efforts\
> taught by the kinsman of the Sun.\
> Any mendicant who keenly applies these\
> may attain the ending of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an4.70">

#### [AN 4.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unprincipled ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhammikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"At a time when kings are unprincipled, royal officials become
unprincipled. When royal officials are unprincipled, brahmins and
householders become unprincipled. When brahmins and householders are
unprincipled, the people of town and country become unprincipled. When
the people of town and country are unprincipled, the courses of the moon
and sun become erratic. ... the courses of the stars and constellations
... the days and nights ... the months and fortnights ... the seasons
and years become erratic. ... the blowing of the winds becomes erratic
and chaotic. ... the deities are angered. ... the heavens don't provide
enough rain. ... the crops ripen erratically. When people eat crops that
have ripened erratically, they become short-lived, ugly, weak, and
sickly.

At a time when kings are principled, royal officials become principled.
... brahmins and householders ... people of town and country become
principled. When the people of town and country are principled, the
courses of the sun and moon become regular. ... the stars and
constellations ... the days and nights ... the months and fortnights ...
the seasons and years become regular. ... the blowing of the winds
becomes regular and orderly. ... the deities are not angered ... ... the
heavens provide plenty of rain. When the heavens provide plenty of rain,
the crops ripen well. When people eat crops that have ripened well, they
become long-lived, beautiful, strong, and healthy.

> When cattle ford a river,\
> if the bull goes off course,\
> they all go off course,\
> because their leader is off course.
>
> So it is for humans:\
> when the one deemed chief\
> behaves badly,\
> what do you expect the rest to do?\
> The whole country sleeps badly,\
> when the king is unprincipled.
>
> When cattle ford a river,\
> if the bull goes straight,\
> they all go straight,\
> because their leader is straight.
>
> So it is for humans:\
> when the one deemed chief\
> does the right thing,\
> what do you expect the rest to do?\
> The whole country sleeps at ease,\
> when the king is just."

</article>

[]{#an4-apannakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Guaranteed {#an4-apannakavagga.xhtml_an4-apannakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.71">

#### [AN 4.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Padhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What four? It's when a mendicant is ethical, learned, energetic, and
wise. When a mendicant has these four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the
defilements."

</article>
<article id="an4.72">

#### [AN 4.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Right View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammādiṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What four? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and
right view. When a mendicant has these four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the
defilements."

</article>
<article id="an4.73">

#### [AN 4.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an untrue person can be known by four qualities. What four?

To start with, an untrue person speaks ill of another even when not
asked, let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's
how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person doesn't speak well of another even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of another without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person doesn't speak ill of themselves even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person speaks well of themselves even when not
asked, let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out.
That's how to know that this is an untrue person. An untrue person can
be known by these four qualities.

A true person can be known by four qualities. What four?

To start with, a true person doesn't speak ill of another even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of another without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person speaks well of another even when not asked,
let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they speak well
of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's how to know
that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person speaks ill of themselves even when not asked,
let alone when asked. But when led on by questions they speak ill of
themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's how to know
that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person doesn't speak well of themselves even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is a true person. A true person
can be known by these four qualities.

It's like a bride on the day or night she's first brought to her
husband's home. Right away she sets up a keen sense of conscience and
prudence for her mother and father in law, her husband, and even the
bondservants, workers, and staff. But after some time, because of living
together and familiarity, she'll even say to her mother and father in
law, or to her husband: 'Go away! What would you know?' In the same way,
on the day or night a mendicant first goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness, right away they set up a keen sense of conscience and
prudence for the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and even the
monastery workers and novices. But after some time, because of living
together and familiarity, they'll even say to their tutor or mentor: 'Go
away! What would you know?'

So you should train like this: 'We will live with hearts like that of a
newly wedded bride.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an4.74">

#### [AN 4.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Best (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are the best. What four? The best ethics,
immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These are the four things that are the
best."

</article>
<article id="an4.75">

#### [AN 4.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Best (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are the best. What four? The best form,
feeling, perception, and existence. These are the four things that are
the best."

</article>
<article id="an4.76">

#### [AN 4.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kusinārā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kusinārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of sal trees in the
sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the time of his
full extinguishment. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. So ask,
mendicants! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'We were in the Teacher's
presence and we weren't able to ask the Buddha a question.'" When this
was said, the mendicants kept silent.

For a second time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: ... For a second
time, the mendicants kept silent.

For a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: ... For a third
time, the mendicants kept silent.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, perhaps you don't ask out of respect for the Teacher. So
let a friend tell a friend." When this was said, the mendicants kept
silent. Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! I am quite confident that there's
not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty
regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the
practice."

"Ānanda, you speak from faith. But the Realized One knows that there's
not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty
regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the
practice. Even the last of these five hundred mendicants is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

</article>
<article id="an4.77">

#### [AN 4.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unthinkable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Acinteyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are unthinkable. They should not be
thought about, and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or
get frustrated. What four?

The scope of the Buddhas ...

The scope of one in absorption ...

The results of deeds ...

Speculation about the world ...

These are the four unthinkable things. They should not be thought about,
and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or get frustrated."

</article>
<article id="an4.78">

#### [AN 4.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Religious Donation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dakkhiṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of purifying a religious
donation. What four? There's a religious donation that's purified by the
giver, not the recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified
by the recipient, not the giver. There's a religious donation that's
purified by neither the giver nor the recipient. There's a religious
donation that's purified by both the giver and the recipient.

And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the
recipient? It's when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the
recipient is unethical, of bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the
giver? It's when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the
recipient is ethical, of good character.

And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of
bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of
good character.

These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation."

</article>
<article id="an4.79">

#### [AN 4.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Business ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vaṇijjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why for different people the
same kind of business undertaking might fail, while another doesn't meet
expectations, another meets expectations, and another exceeds
expectations?"

"Sāriputta, take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and
invites them to ask for what they need. But they fail to give what's
requested. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn in
this place, whatever business they undertake fails.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, but don't meet
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake doesn't meet
expectations.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, meeting
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake meets expectations.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, exceeding
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake exceeds expectations.

This is the cause, this is the reason why for different people the same
kind of business undertaking might fail, while another doesn't meet
expectations, another meets expectations, and another exceeds
expectations."

</article>
<article id="an4.80">

#### [AN 4.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Persia ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kambojasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why females don't attend
council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia?"

"Ānanda, females are irritable, jealous, stingy, and unintelligent. This
is the cause, this is the reason why females don't attend council
meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia."

</article>

[]{#an4-macalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Confirmed {#an4-macalavagga.xhtml_an4-macalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.81">

#### [AN 4.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Killing Living Creatures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāṇātipātasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and
lie. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie.
Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.82">

#### [AN 4.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Musāvādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. Someone
with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.83">

#### [AN 4.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Where Criticism Takes You ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avaṇṇārahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of
criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise. They arouse
faith in things that are dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things
that are inspiring. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? After
examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism,
and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't arouse faith in
things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.84">

#### [AN 4.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Valuing Anger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kodhagarusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They value anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor
rather than the true teaching. Someone with these four qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
value the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material
things, or honor. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to
heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.85">

#### [AN 4.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [From Darkness to Darkness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tamotamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  The dark bound for darkness,
2.  the dark bound for light,
3.  the light bound for darkness, and
4.  the light bound for light.

And how is a person dark and bound for darkness? It's when a person is
reborn in a low family---a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers,
hunters, chariot-makers, or scavengers---poor, with little to eat or
drink, where life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. And
they're ugly, unsightly, deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or
half-paralyzed. They don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting.
And they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. That's how a person is dark and bound for
darkness.

And how is a person dark and bound for light? It's when a person is
reborn in a low family ... But they do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's how a person is dark and bound
for light.

And how is a person light and bound for darkness? It's when a person is
reborn in an eminent family---a well-to-do family of aristocrats,
brahmins, or householders---rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of
gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and
grain. And they're attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. They get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. But they do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. That's how a person is light and bound for darkness.

And how is a person light and bound for light? It's when a person is
reborn in an eminent family ... And they do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's how a person is light and
bound for light.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.86">

#### [AN 4.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sunk Low ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Oṇatoṇatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One sunk low who sinks lower,
2.  one sunk low who rises high,
3.  one risen high who sinks low, and
4.  one risen high who rises higher.

... These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.87">

#### [AN 4.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Son ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant is a
practicing trainee, who lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke. It's like the eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has
not yet been anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the
succession. In the same way, a mendicant is a practicing trainee, who
lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. That's how a
person is a confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. But they don't have direct meditative
experience of the eight liberations. That's how a person is a white
lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant realizes
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
... And they have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations.
That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept---robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---rarely
using them without invitation. When living with other spiritual
practitioners, they usually treat them agreeably by way of body, speech,
and mind, and rarely disagreeably. And they usually present them with
agreeable things, rarely with disagreeable ones. They're healthy, so the
various unpleasant feelings---stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm,
wind, or their conjunction; or caused by change in weather, by not
taking care of yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past
deeds---usually don't come up. They get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ... That's how
a person is an exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me. For I usually use only what I've been invited to accept ...
When living with other spiritual practitioners, I usually treat them
agreeably ... I'm healthy ... I get the four absorptions when I want,
without trouble or difficulty. And I've realized the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ... So if anyone
should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics, it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.88">

#### [AN 4.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁyojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of three fetters---is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. That's how a person is a
confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and
delusion---is a once-returner. They come back to this world once only,
then make an end of suffering. That's how a person is a white lotus
ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of the five lower fetters---is reborn spontaneously. They're
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. That's
how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. That's how a person is an
exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.89">

#### [AN 4.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Right View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammādiṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant has right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. That's how a person is a
confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when they have right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. But they don't have direct meditative experience of the eight
liberations. That's how a person is a white lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when they have right view
... and right freedom. And they do have direct meditative experience of
the eight liberations. That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept ... And
if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.90">

#### [AN 4.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Aggregates ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant is a
trainee who hasn't achieved their heart's desire, but lives aspiring to
the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. That's how a person is a confirmed
ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 'Such
is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' But they don't have direct meditative experience of
the eight liberations. That's how a person is a white lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 'Such
is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' And they have direct meditative experience of the
eight liberations. That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept ... And
if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>

[]{#an4-asuravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Demons {#an4-asuravagga.xhtml_an4-asuravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.91">

#### [AN 4.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Titans ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  A titan surrounded by titans,
2.  a titan surrounded by gods,
3.  a god surrounded by titans, and
4.  a god surrounded by gods.

And how is a person a titan surrounded by titans? It's when a person is
unethical, of bad character, and their followers are the same. That's
how a person is a titan surrounded by titans.

And how is a person a titan surrounded by gods? It's when a person is
unethical, of bad character, but their followers are ethical, of good
character. That's how a person is a titan surrounded by gods.

And how is a person a god surrounded by titans? It's when a person is
ethical, of good character, but their followers are unethical, of bad
character. That's how a person is a god surrounded by titans.

And how is a person a god surrounded by gods? It's when a person is
ethical, of good character, and their followers are the same. That's how
a person is a god surrounded by gods.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.92">

#### [AN 4.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

One person has internal serenity of heart, but not the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles.

One person has the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, but not
internal serenity of heart.

One person has neither internal serenity of heart, nor the higher wisdom
of discernment of principles.

One person has both internal serenity of heart, and the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.93">

#### [AN 4.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person has internal serenity of heart, but not the higher wisdom
    of discernment of principles.
2.  One person has the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, but
    not internal serenity of heart.
3.  One person has neither internal serenity of heart, nor the higher
    wisdom of discernment of principles.
4.  One person has both internal serenity of heart, and the higher
    wisdom of discernment of principles.

As for the person who has serenity but not discernment: grounded on
serenity, they should practice meditation to get discernment. After some
time they have both serenity and discernment.

As for the person who has discernment but not serenity: grounded on
discernment, they should practice meditation to get serenity. After some
time they have both discernment and serenity.

As for the person who has neither serenity nor discernment: in order to
get those skillful qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm,
effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational
awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to
extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way,
in order to get those skillful qualities, that person should apply
intense enthusiasm ... After some time they have both serenity and
discernment.

As for the person who has both serenity and discernment: grounded on
those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end
the defilements.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.94">

#### [AN 4.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

One person has internal serenity of heart, but not the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles. One person has the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles, but not internal serenity of heart. One
person has neither internal serenity of heart, nor the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles. One person has both internal serenity of
heart, and the higher wisdom of discernment of principles.

As for the person who has serenity but not discernment: they should
approach someone who has discernment and ask: 'Reverend, how should
conditions be seen? How should they be comprehended? How should they be
discerned?' That person would answer from their own experience: 'This is
how conditions should be seen, comprehended, and discerned.' After some
time they have both serenity and discernment.

As for the person who has discernment but not serenity: they should
approach someone who has serenity and ask: 'Reverend, how should the
mind be stilled? How should it be settled? How should it be unified? How
should it be immersed in samādhi?' That person would answer from their
own experience: 'Reverend, this is how the mind should be stilled,
settled, unified, and immersed in samādhi.' After some time they have
both discernment and serenity.

As for the person who has neither serenity nor discernment: they should
approach someone who has serenity and discernment and ask: 'Reverend,
how should the mind be stilled? How should it be settled? How should it
be unified? How should it be immersed in samādhi?' How should conditions
be seen? How should they be comprehended? How should they be discerned?'
That person would answer as they've seen and known: 'Reverend, this is
how the mind should be stilled, settled, unified, and immersed in
samādhi. And this is how conditions should be seen, comprehended, and
discerned.' After some time they have both serenity and discernment.

As for the person who has both serenity and discernment: grounded on
those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end
the defilements.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.95">

#### [AN 4.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Firebrand ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chavālātasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who practices to benefit neither themselves nor others;
2.  one who practices to benefit others, but not themselves;
3.  one who practices to benefit themselves, but not others; and
4.  one who practices to benefit both themselves and others.

Suppose there was a firebrand for lighting a funeral pyre, burning at
both ends, and smeared with dung in the middle. It couldn't be used as
timber either in the village or the wilderness. The person who practices
to benefit neither themselves nor others is like this, I say.

The person who practices to benefit others, but not themselves, is
better than that. The person who practices to benefit themselves, but
not others, is better than both of those. But the person who practices
to benefit both themselves and others is the foremost, best, chief,
highest, and finest of the four.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
practices to benefit both themselves and others is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of the four.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.96">

#### [AN 4.96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Removing Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rāgavinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who practices to benefit themselves, but not others;
2.  one who practices to benefit others, but not themselves;
3.  one who practices to benefit neither themselves nor others; and
4.  one who practices to benefit both themselves and others.

And how does a person practice to benefit themselves, but not others?
It's when a person practices to remove their own greed, hate, and
delusion, but doesn't encourage others to do the same. That's how a
person practices to benefit themselves, but not others.

And how does a person practice to benefit others, but not themselves?
It's when a person doesn't practice to remove their own greed, hate, and
delusion, but encourages others to remove theirs. That's how a person
practices to benefit others, but not themselves.

And how does a person practice to benefit neither themselves nor others?
It's when a person doesn't practice to remove their own greed, hate, and
delusion, nor do they encourage others to remove theirs. That's how a
person practices to benefit neither themselves nor others.

And how does a person practice to benefit both themselves and others?
It's when a person practices to remove their own greed, hate, and
delusion, and encourages others to remove theirs. That's how a person
practices to benefit both themselves and others.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.97">

#### [AN 4.97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Quick-witted ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khippanisantisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who practices to benefit themselves, but not others;
2.  one who practices to benefit others, but not themselves;
3.  one who practices to benefit neither themselves nor others; and
4.  one who practices to benefit both themselves and others.

And how does a person practice to benefit themselves, but not others?
It's when a person is quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings.
They readily memorize the teachings they've heard. They examine the
meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding the meaning and
the teaching, they practice accordingly. But they're not a good speaker.
Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't express the
meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their
spiritual companions. That's how a person practices to benefit
themselves, but not others.

And how does a person practice to benefit others, but not themselves?
It's when a person is not quick-witted when it comes to skillful
teachings. ... But they're a good speaker. ... That's how a person
practices to benefit others, but not themselves.

And how does a person practice to benefit neither themselves nor others?
It's when a person is not quick-witted when it comes to skillful
teachings. ... Nor are they a good speaker. ... That's how a person
practices to benefit neither themselves nor others.

And how does a person practice to benefit both themselves and others?
It's when a person is quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings.
... And they're a good speaker. ... That's how a person practices to
benefit both themselves and others.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.98">

#### [AN 4.98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [To Benefit Oneself ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Attahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who practices to benefit themselves, but not others;
2.  one who practices to benefit others, but not themselves;
3.  one who practices to benefit neither themselves nor others; and
4.  one who practices to benefit both themselves and others.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.99">

#### [AN 4.99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training Rules ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhāpadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who practices to benefit themselves, but not others;
2.  one who practices to benefit others, but not themselves;
3.  one who practices to benefit neither themselves nor others; and
4.  one who practices to benefit both themselves and others.

And how does a person practice to benefit themselves, but not others?
It's when a person doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. But they
don't encourage others to do the same. That's how a person practices to
benefit themselves, but not others.

And how does a person practice to benefit others, but not themselves?
It's when a person kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual
misconduct, lies, and uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. But
they encourage others to not do these things. That's how a person
practices to benefit others, but not themselves.

And how does a person practice to benefit neither themselves nor others?
It's when a person kills, etc. ... and doesn't encourage others to not
do these things. That's how a person practices to benefit neither
themselves nor others.

And how does a person practice to benefit both themselves and others?
It's when a person doesn't kill, etc. ... and encourages others to do
the same. That's how a person practices to benefit both themselves and
others.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.100">

#### [AN 4.100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Potaliya the Wanderer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Potaliyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the wanderer Potaliya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side, and the Buddha said to him:

"Potaliya, these four people are found in the world. What four?

One person criticizes those deserving of criticism at the right time,
truthfully and correctly. But they don't praise those deserving of
praise at the right time, truthfully and correctly.

Another person praises those deserving of praise ... But they don't
criticize those deserving of criticism ...

Another person doesn't praise those deserving of praise ... Nor do they
criticize those deserving of criticism ...

Another person criticizes those deserving of criticism at the right
time, truthfully and correctly. And they praise those deserving of
praise at the right time, truthfully and correctly.

These are the four people found in the world. Of these four people, who
do you believe to be the finest?"

"Mister Gotama, of these four people, it is the person who neither
praises those deserving of praise at the right time, truthfully and
correctly; nor criticizes those deserving of criticism at the right
time, truthfully and correctly. That is the person I believe to be the
finest. Why is that? Because, Mister Gotama, equanimity is the best."

"Potaliya, of these four people, it is the person who criticizes those
deserving of criticism at the right time, truthfully and correctly; and
praises those deserving of praise at the right time, truthfully and
correctly. That is the person I consider to be the finest. Why is that?
Because, Potaliya, understanding of time and context is the best."

"Mister Gotama, of these four people, it is the person who criticizes
those deserving of criticism at the right time, truthfully and
correctly; and praises those deserving of praise at the right time,
truthfully and correctly. That is the person I believe to be the finest.
Why is that? Because, Mister Gotama, understanding of time and context
is the best.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>

[]{#an4-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Third Fifty {#an4-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an4-tatiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Gods of the Clouds {#an4-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an4-valahakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.101">

#### [AN 4.101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Clouds (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavalāhakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of clouds. What four?

1.  One thunders but doesn't rain,
2.  one rains but doesn't thunder,
3.  one neither thunders nor rains, and
4.  one both rains and thunders.

These are the four kinds of clouds. In the same way, these four people
similar to clouds are found in the world. What four?

1.  One thunders but doesn't rain,
2.  one rains but doesn't thunder,
3.  one neither thunders nor rains, and
4.  one both rains and thunders.

And how does a person thunder but not rain? It's when a person is a
talker, not a doer. That's how a person thunders but doesn't rain. That
person is like a cloud that thunders but doesn't rain, I say.

And how does a person rain but not thunder? It's when a person is a
doer, not a talker. ...

And how does a person neither thunder nor rain? It's when a person is
neither a talker nor a doer. ...

And how does a person both thunder and rain? It's when a person is both
a talker and a doer. ...

These four people similar to clouds are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.102">

#### [AN 4.102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Clouds (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavalāhakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of clouds. What four?

1.  One thunders but doesn't rain,
2.  one rains but doesn't thunder,
3.  one neither thunders nor rains, and
4.  one both rains and thunders.

These are the four kinds of clouds. In the same way, these four people
similar to clouds are found in the world. What four?

1.  One thunders but doesn't rain,
2.  one rains but doesn't thunder,
3.  one neither thunders nor rains, and
4.  one both rains and thunders.

And how does a person thunder but not rain? It's when a person memorizes
the teaching---statements, mixed prose and verse, discussions, verses,
inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories,
and elaborations. But they don't truly understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. That's how a person thunders but doesn't rain. That person
is like a cloud that thunders but doesn't rain, I say.

And how does a person rain but not thunder? It's when a person doesn't
memorize the teaching ... But they truly understand: 'This is suffering'
...

And how does a person neither thunder nor rain? It's when a person
doesn't memorize the teaching ... Nor do they truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ...

And how does a person both thunder and rain? It's when a person
memorizes the teaching ... And they truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ...

These four people similar to clouds are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.103">

#### [AN 4.103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Pots ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kumbhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four pots. What four?

1.  Covered but hollow,
2.  uncovered but full,
3.  uncovered and hollow, and
4.  covered and full.

These are the four pots. In the same way, these four people similar to
pots are found in the world. What four?

1.  Covered but hollow,
2.  uncovered but full,
3.  uncovered and hollow, and
4.  covered and full.

And how is a person covered but hollow? It's when a person is impressive
when going out and coming back, when looking ahead and aside, when
bending and extending the limbs, and when bearing the outer robe, bowl
and robes. But they don't truly understand: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. That's how a person is covered but hollow. That person is
like a pot that's covered but hollow, I say.

And how is a person uncovered but full? It's when a person is not
impressive ... But they truly understand: 'This is suffering' ...

And how is a person uncovered and hollow? It's when a person is not
impressive ... Nor do they truly understand: 'This is suffering' ...

And how is a person covered and full? It's when a person is impressive
... And they truly understand: 'This is suffering' ...

These four people similar to pots are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.104">

#### [AN 4.104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lakes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udakarahadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four lakes. What four?

1.  One is shallow but appears deep,
2.  one is deep but appears shallow,
3.  one is shallow and appears shallow, and
4.  one is deep and appears deep.

These are the four lakes. In the same way, these four people similar to
lakes are found in the world. What four?

1.  One is shallow but appears deep,
2.  one is deep but appears shallow,
3.  one is shallow and appears shallow, and
4.  one is deep and appears deep.

And how is a person shallow but appears deep? It's when a person is
impressive when going out and coming back, when looking ahead and aside,
when bending and extending the limbs, and when bearing the outer robe,
bowl and robes. But they don't really understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. That's how a person is shallow but appears deep. That person
is like a lake that's shallow but appears deep, I say.

And how is a person deep but appears shallow? It's when a person is not
impressive ... But they really understand: 'This is suffering' ...

And how is a person shallow and appears shallow? It's when a person is
not impressive ... Nor do they really understand: 'This is suffering'
...

And how is a person deep and appears deep? It's when a person is
impressive ... And they really understand: 'This is suffering' ...

These four people similar to lakes are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.105">

#### [AN 4.105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mangoes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ambasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four mangoes. What four?

1.  One is unripe but seems ripe,
2.  one is ripe but seems unripe,
3.  one is unripe and seems unripe, and
4.  one is ripe and seems ripe.

These are the four mangoes.

In the same way, these four people similar to mangoes are found in the
world. What four?

1.  One is unripe but seems ripe,
2.  one is ripe but seems unripe,
3.  one is unripe and seems unripe, and
4.  one is ripe and seems ripe.

And how is a person unripe but seems ripe? It's when a person is
impressive when going out and coming back, when looking ahead and aside,
when bending and extending the limbs, and when bearing the outer robe,
bowl and robes. But they don't really understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. That's how a person is unripe but seems ripe. That person is
like a mango that's unripe but seems ripe, I say.

And how is a person ripe but seems unripe? It's when a person is not
impressive ... But they really understand: 'This is suffering' ...

And how is a person unripe and seems unripe? It's when a person is not
impressive ... Nor do they really understand: 'This is suffering' ...

And how is a person ripe and seems ripe? It's when a person is
impressive ... And they really understand: 'This is suffering' ...

These four people similar to mangoes are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.106">

#### [AN 4.106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mangoes (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [(Dutiyaambasutta)]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

(This is a ghost sutta: there is no text for it in any available
editions.)

</article>
<article id="an4.107">

#### [AN 4.107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mūsikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mice. What four?

1.  One makes a hole but doesn't live in it,
2.  one lives in a hole but doesn't make it,
3.  one neither makes a hole nor lives in it, and
4.  one both makes a hole and lives in it.

These are the four kinds of mice. In the same way, these four people
similar to mice are found in the world. What four?

1.  One makes a hole but doesn't live in it,
2.  one lives in a hole but doesn't make it,
3.  one neither makes a hole nor lives in it, and
4.  one both makes a hole and lives in it.

And how does a person make a hole but not live in it? It's when a person
memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions,
verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing
stories, and elaborations. But they don't really understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a person makes a hole but doesn't
live in it. That person is like a mouse that makes a hole but doesn't
live in it, I say.

And how does a person live in a hole but not make it? It's when a person
doesn't memorize the teaching ... But they really understand: 'This is
suffering' ...

And how does a person neither make a hole nor live in it? It's when a
person doesn't memorize the teaching ... Nor do they really understand:
'This is suffering' ...

And how does a person both make a hole and live in it? It's when a
person memorizes the teaching ... And they really understand: 'This is
suffering' ...

These four people similar to mice are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.108">

#### [AN 4.108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Oxen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balībaddasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of oxen. What four?

1.  One hostile to its own herd, not others;
2.  one hostile to other herds, not its own;
3.  one hostile to both its own herd and others; and
4.  one hostile to neither its own herd nor others.

These are the four kinds of oxen. In the same way, these four people
similar to oxen are found in the world. What four?

1.  One hostile to their own herd, not others;
2.  one hostile to other herds, not their own;
3.  one hostile to both their own herd and others; and
4.  one hostile to neither their own herd nor others.

And how is a person hostile to their own herd, not others? It's when a
person intimidates their own followers, not the followers of others.
That's how a person is hostile to their own herd, not others. That
person is like an ox that's hostile to its own herd, not others.

And how is a person hostile to other herds, not their own? It's when a
person intimidates the followers of others, not their own. ...

And how is a person hostile to both their own herd and others? It's when
a person intimidates their own followers and the followers of others.
...

And how is a person hostile to neither their own herd nor others? It's
when a person doesn't intimidate their own followers or the followers of
others.

These four people similar to oxen are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.109">

#### [AN 4.109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Trees ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rukkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of tree. What four?

1.  One is a softwood surrounded by softwoods,
2.  one is a softwood surrounded by hardwoods,
3.  one is a hardwood surrounded by softwoods, and
4.  one is a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods.

These are the four kinds of tree. In the same way, these four people
similar to trees are found in the world. What four?

1.  One is a softwood surrounded by softwoods,
2.  one is a softwood surrounded by hardwoods,
3.  one is a hardwood surrounded by softwoods, and
4.  one is a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods.

And how is a person a softwood surrounded by softwoods? It's when a
person is unethical, of bad character, and their followers are the same.
That's how a person is a softwood surrounded by softwoods. That person
is like a softwood tree that's surrounded by softwoods, I say.

And how is a person a softwood surrounded by hardwoods? It's when a
person is unethical, of bad character, but their followers are ethical,
of good character. ...

And how is a person a hardwood surrounded by softwoods? It's when a
person is ethical, of good character, but their followers are unethical,
of bad character. ...

And how is a person a hardwood surrounded by hardwoods? It's when a
person is ethical, of good character, and their followers are the same.

These four people similar to trees are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.110">

#### [AN 4.110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vipers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsīvisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of viper. What four?

1.  One whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal,
2.  one whose venom is lethal but not fast-acting,
3.  one whose venom is both fast-acting and lethal, and
4.  one whose venom is neither fast-acting nor lethal.

These are the four kinds of viper. In the same way, these four people
similar to vipers are found in the world. What four?

1.  One whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal,
2.  one whose venom is lethal but not fast-acting,
3.  one whose venom is both fast-acting and lethal, and
4.  one whose venom is neither fast-acting nor lethal.

And how is a person's venom fast-acting but not lethal? It's when a
person is often angry, but their anger doesn't linger long. That's how a
person's venom is fast-acting but not lethal. That person is like a
viper whose venom is fast-acting but not lethal.

And how is a person's venom lethal but not fast-acting? It's when a
person is not often angry, but their anger lingers for a long time.

And how is a person's venom both fast-acting and lethal? It's when a
person is often angry, and their anger lingers for a long time.

And how is a person's venom neither fast-acting nor lethal? It's when a
person is not often angry, and their anger doesn't linger long.

These four people similar to vipers are found in the world."

</article>

[]{#an4-kesivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Kesi {#an4-kesivagga.xhtml_an4-kesivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.111">

#### [AN 4.111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kesi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kesisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Kesi the horse trainer went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down
to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Kesi, you're known as a horse
trainer. Just how do you guide a horse in training?"

"Sir, I guide a horse in training sometimes gently, sometimes harshly,
and sometimes both gently and harshly."

"Kesi, what do you do with a horse in training that doesn't follow these
forms of training?"

"In that case, sir, I kill it. Why is that? So that I don't disgrace my
tradition.

But sir, the Buddha is the supreme guide for those who wish to train.
Just how do you guide a person in training?"

"Kesi, I guide a person in training sometimes gently, sometimes harshly,
and sometimes both gently and harshly.

The gentle way is this: 'This is good conduct by way of body, speech,
and mind. This is the result of good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind. This is life as a god. This is life as a human.'

The harsh way is this: 'This is bad conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind. This is the result of bad conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind. This is life in hell. This is life as an animal. This is life as a
ghost.'

The both gentle and harsh way is this: 'This is good conduct ... this is
bad conduct ...'"

"Sir, what do you do with a person in training who doesn't follow these
forms of training?"

"In that case, Kesi, I kill them."

"Sir, it's not appropriate for the Buddha to kill living creatures. And
yet you say you kill them."

"It's true, Kesi, it's not appropriate for a Realized One to kill living
creatures. But when a person in training doesn't follow any of these
forms of training, the Realized One doesn't think they're worth advising
or instructing, and neither do their sensible spiritual companions. For
it is killing in the training of the Noble One when the Realized One
doesn't think they're worth advising or instructing, and neither do
their sensible spiritual companions."

"Well, they're definitely dead when the Realized One doesn't think
they're worth advising or instructing, and neither do their sensible
spiritual companions. Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the
Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an4.112">

#### [AN 4.112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Speed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Javasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
four? Integrity, speed, patience, and sweetness. A fine royal
thoroughbred with these four factors is worthy of a king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? Integrity, speed, patience, and
sweetness. A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.113">

#### [AN 4.113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Goad ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Patodasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four fine thoroughbreds are found in the world. What
four?

One fine thoroughbred is moved to act when it sees the shadow of the
goad, thinking: 'What task will the horse trainer have me do today? How
should I respond?' Some fine thoroughbreds are like that. This is the
first fine thoroughbred found in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred isn't moved to act when it sees the
shadow of the goad, but only when its hairs are struck, thinking: 'What
task will the horse trainer have me do today? How should I respond?'
Some fine thoroughbreds are like that. This is the second fine
thoroughbred found in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred isn't moved to act when it sees the
shadow of the goad, nor when its hairs are struck, but only when its
hide is struck, thinking: 'What task will the horse trainer have me do
today? How should I respond?' Some fine thoroughbreds are like that.
This is the third fine thoroughbred found in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred isn't moved to act when it sees the
shadow of the goad, nor when its hairs are struck, nor when its hide is
struck, but only when its bone is struck, thinking: 'What task will the
horse trainer have me do today? How should I respond?' Some fine
thoroughbreds are like that. This is the fourth fine thoroughbred found
in the world.

These are the four fine thoroughbreds found in the world.

In the same way, these four fine thoroughbred people are found in the
world. What four?

One fine thoroughbred person hears about the suffering or death of a
woman or man in such and such village or town. They're moved to act by
this, and strive effectively. Applying themselves, they directly realize
the ultimate truth, and see it with penetrating wisdom. This person is
like the fine thoroughbred that's shaken when it sees the shadow of the
goad. Some fine thoroughbred people are like that. This is the first
fine thoroughbred person found in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred person doesn't hear about the
suffering or death of a woman or man in such and such village or town,
but they see it themselves. They're moved to act by this, and strive
effectively. Applying themselves, they directly realize the ultimate
truth, and see it with penetrating wisdom. This person is like the fine
thoroughbred that's moved to act when its hairs are struck. Some fine
thoroughbred people are like that. This is the second fine thoroughbred
person found in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred person doesn't hear about the
suffering or death of a woman or man in such and such village or town,
nor do they see it themselves, but it happens to their own relative or
family member. They're moved to act by this, and strive effectively.
Applying themselves, they directly realize the ultimate truth, and see
it with penetrating wisdom. This person is like the fine thoroughbred
that's moved to act when its skin is struck. Some fine thoroughbred
people are like that. This is the third fine thoroughbred person found
in the world.

Furthermore, one fine thoroughbred person doesn't hear about the
suffering or death of a woman or man in such and such village or town,
nor do they see it themselves, nor does it happen to their own relative
or family member, but they themselves are afflicted with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. They're moved to act by this, and strive effectively.
Applying themselves, they directly realize the ultimate truth, and see
it with penetrating wisdom. This person is like the fine thoroughbred
that's moved to act when its bone is struck. Some fine thoroughbred
people are like that. This is the fourth fine thoroughbred person found
in the world.

These are the four fine thoroughbred people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.114">

#### [AN 4.114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Royal Elephant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
four? A royal bull elephant listens, destroys, endures, and goes fast.

And how does a royal bull elephant listen? It's when a royal bull
elephant pays attention, applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly,
and actively listens to whatever task the elephant trainer has it do,
whether or not it has done it before. That's how a royal bull elephant
listens.

And how does a royal bull elephant destroy? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle destroys elephants with their riders, horses with
their riders, chariots and charioteers, and foot soldiers. That's how a
royal bull elephant destroys.

And how does a royal bull elephant endure? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and
axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and
cymbals. That's how a royal bull elephant endures.

And how does a royal bull elephant go fast? It's when a royal bull
elephant swiftly goes in whatever direction the elephant trainer sends
it, whether or not it has been there before. That's how a royal bull
elephant goes fast. A royal bull elephant with four factors is worthy of
a king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? A mendicant listens, destroys,
endures, and goes fast.

And how does a mendicant listen? It's when a mendicant pays attention,
applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens when
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One is being taught.
That's how a mendicant listens.

And how does a mendicant destroy? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's how a mendicant
destroys.

And how does a mendicant endure? It's when a mendicant endures cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and they put up with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. That's how a mendicant endures.

And how does a mendicant go fast? It's when a mendicant swiftly goes in
the direction they've never gone before in all this long time; that is,
the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. That's how a
mendicant goes fast. A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the
supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.115">

#### [AN 4.115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four things. What four?

1.  There is a thing that's unpleasant to do, and doing it proves
    harmful.
2.  There is a thing that's unpleasant to do, but doing it proves
    beneficial.
3.  There is a thing that's pleasant to do, but doing it proves harmful.
4.  There is a thing that's pleasant to do, and doing it proves
    beneficial.

Take the thing that's unpleasant to do, and doing it proves harmful.
This is regarded as a thing that shouldn't be done on both grounds:
because it's unpleasant, and because doing it proves harmful. This is
regarded as a thing that shouldn't be done on both grounds.

Next, take the thing that's unpleasant to do, but doing it proves
beneficial. It is here that you can tell who is foolish and who is
astute in regard to human strength, energy, and vigor. A fool doesn't
reflect: 'Despite the fact that this thing is unpleasant to do, doing it
still proves beneficial.' They don't do that thing, so that proves
harmful. An astute person does reflect: 'Despite the fact that this
thing is unpleasant to do, doing it still proves beneficial.' They do
that thing, so that proves beneficial.

Next, take the thing that's pleasant to do, but doing it proves harmful.
It is here that you can tell who is foolish and who is astute in regard
to human strength, energy, and vigor. A fool doesn't reflect: 'Despite
the fact that this thing is pleasant to do, doing it still proves
harmful.' They do that thing, and so that proves harmful. An astute
person does reflect: 'Despite the fact that this thing is pleasant to
do, doing it still proves harmful.' They don't do that thing, so that
proves beneficial.

Next, take the thing that's pleasant to do, and doing it proves
beneficial. This is regarded as a thing that should be done on both
grounds: because it's pleasant, and because doing it proves beneficial.
This is regarded as a thing that should be done on both grounds.

These are the four things."

</article>
<article id="an4.116">

#### [AN 4.116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Diligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appamādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should be diligent in four situations. What four? Give
up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind; and develop good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. Don't neglect these things.
Give up wrong view; and develop right view. Don't neglect this.

A mendicant who has done these things does not fear death in lives to
come."

</article>
<article id="an4.117">

#### [AN 4.117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Guarding ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ārakkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, in your own way you should practice diligence, mindfulness,
and guarding of the mind in four situations. What four?

'May my mind not be aroused by things that arouse greed.' In your own
way you should practice diligence, mindfulness, and guarding of the
mind.

'May my mind not be angered by things that provoke hate.' ...

'May my mind not be deluded by things that promote delusion.' ...

'May my mind not be intoxicated by things that intoxicate.' ...

When a mendicant's mind is no longer affected by greed, hate, delusion,
or intoxication because they've got rid of these things, they don't
shake, tremble, quake, or get nervous, nor are they persuaded by the
teachings of other ascetics."

</article>
<article id="an4.118">

#### [AN 4.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁvejanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a faithful gentleman should go to see these four inspiring
places. What four?

Thinking: 'Here the Realized One was born!'---that is an inspiring
place.

Thinking: 'Here the Realized One became awakened as a supreme fully
awakened Buddha!'---that is an inspiring place.

Thinking: 'Here the Realized One rolled forth the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma!'---that is an inspiring place.

Thinking: 'Here the Realized One became fully quenched in the element of
extinguishment, with no residue!'---that is an inspiring place.

These are the four inspiring places that a faithful gentleman should go
to see."

</article>
<article id="an4.119">

#### [AN 4.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perils (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four perils. What four? The perils of
rebirth, old age, sickness, and death.

These are the four perils."

</article>
<article id="an4.120">

#### [AN 4.120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perils (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four perils. What four? The perils of fire,
water, kings, and bandits. These are the four perils."

</article>

[]{#an4-bhayavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Perils {#an4-bhayavagga.xhtml_an4-bhayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.121">

#### [AN 4.121]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Guilt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Attānuvādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four fears. What four? The fears of guilt,
shame, punishment, and going to a bad place.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of guilt? It's when someone reflects:
'If I were to do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind, wouldn't I
blame myself for my conduct?' Being afraid of guilt, they give up bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called
the fear of guilt.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of shame? It's when someone reflects:
'If I were to do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind, wouldn't
others blame me for my conduct?' Being afraid of shame, they give up bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called
the fear of shame.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of punishment? It's when someone sees
that the kings have arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to
various punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands
or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot',
the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of fire', the
'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the 'antelope',
the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the 'twisting bar',
the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the dogs,
being impaled alive, and being beheaded.

They think: 'If I were to do the same kind of bad deed, the kings would
punish me in the same way.' ... Being afraid of punishment, they don't
steal the belongings of others. They give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the fear of punishment.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of rebirth in a bad place? It's when
someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad result
in the next life. If I were to do such bad things, when my body breaks
up, after death, I'd be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.' Being afraid of rebirth in a bad place, they give up
bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct
by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is
called the fear of rebirth in a bad place.

These are the four fears."

</article>
<article id="an4.122">

#### [AN 4.122]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Danger of Waves ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ūmibhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, anyone who enters the water should anticipate four dangers.
What four? The dangers of waves, gharials, whirlpools, and sharks.

These are the four dangers that anyone who enters the water should
anticipate. In the same way, a gentleman gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness in this teaching and training should anticipate four
dangers. What four? The dangers of waves, gharials, whirlpools, and
sharks.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of waves? It's when a gentleman has
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking:
'I'm swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in
suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of
suffering.' When they've gone forth, their spiritual companions advise
and instruct them: 'You should go out like this, and come back like
that. You should look to the front like this, and to the side like that.
You should contract your limbs like this, and extend them like that.
This is how you should bear your outer robe, bowl, and robes.' They
think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we advised and instructed others. And
now these mendicants---who you'd think were our children or
grandchildren---imagine they can advise and instruct us!' Angry and
upset, they resign the training and return to a lesser life. This is
called a mendicant who rejects the training and returns to a lesser life
for fear of the danger of waves. 'Danger of waves' is a term for anger
and distress. This is called the danger of waves.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of gharials? It's when a gentleman
has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, their spiritual companions advise and instruct them:
'You may eat, consume, taste, and drink these things, but not those. You
may eat what's allowable, but not what's unallowable. You may eat at the
right time, but not at the wrong time.' They think: 'Formerly, as
laypeople, we used to eat, consume, taste, and drink what we wanted, not
what we didn't want. We ate and drank both allowable and unallowable
things, at the right time and the wrong time. And these faithful
householders give us delicious fresh and cooked foods at the wrong time
of day. But these guys imagine they can gag our mouths!' Angry and
upset, they resign the training and return to a lesser life. This is
called a mendicant who rejects the training and returns to a lesser life
for fear of the danger of gharials. 'Danger of gharials' is a term for
gluttony. This is called the danger of gharials.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of whirlpools? It's when a gentleman
has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl
and robe, enter a village or town for alms without guarding body,
speech, and mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without
restraining the sense faculties. There they see a householder or their
child amusing themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. They think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we amused
ourselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. And it's true that my family is wealthy. I can both enjoy
my wealth and make merit. Why don't I resign the training and return to
a lesser life, so I can enjoy my wealth and make merit?' They resign the
training and return to a lesser life. This is called a mendicant who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life for fear of the danger
of whirlpools. 'Danger of whirlpools' is a term for the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. This is called the danger of whirlpools.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of sharks? It's when a gentleman has
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl
and robe, enter a village or town for alms without guarding body,
speech, and mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without
restraining the sense faculties. There they see a female scantily clad,
with revealing clothes. Lust infects their mind, so they resign the
training and return to a lesser life. This is called a mendicant who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life because they're afraid
of the danger of sharks. 'Danger of sharks' is a term for females. This
is called the danger of sharks.

These are the four dangers that a gentleman gone forth from the lay life
to homelessness in this teaching and training should anticipate."

</article>
<article id="an4.123">

#### [AN 4.123]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Difference (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanānākaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying.
If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often
without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the
gods of Brahmā's Host. The lifespan of the gods of Brahma's Host is one
eon. An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is
spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But
a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is
spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This is the
difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary
person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping
it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide in that, are
committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they
die they're reborn in the company of the gods of streaming radiance. The
lifespan of the gods of streaming radiance is two eons. An ordinary
person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they
go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the
Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then
they're extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a
learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person, that is, when
there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, with the fading away of rapture, enters
and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide
in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing
it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of universal
beauty. The lifespan of the gods of universal beauty is four eons. An
ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent,
then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a
disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is
spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This is the
difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary
person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending
former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they
abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without
losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of
abundant fruit. The lifespan of the gods of abundant fruit is five
hundred eons. An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those
gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost
realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of
those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This
is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned
ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.124">

#### [AN 4.124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Difference (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanānākaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ...
They contemplate the phenomena there---included in form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of the pure
abodes. This rebirth is not shared with ordinary people.

Furthermore, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping
it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They contemplate the
phenomena there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the pure abodes. This rebirth is
not shared with ordinary people.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.125">

#### [AN 4.125]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Love (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamettāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They enjoy this and like it and find it
satisfying. If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on
it often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company
of the gods of Brahmā's Host. The lifespan of the gods of Brahma's Host
is one eon. An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those
gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost
realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of
those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This
is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned
ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person meditates spreading a heart full of compassion ...
rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. They enjoy this and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide
in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing
it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of streaming
radiance. The lifespan of the gods of streaming radiance is two eons.
... they're reborn in the company of the gods of universal beauty. The
lifespan of the gods of universal beauty is four eons. ... they're
reborn in the company of the gods of abundant fruit. The lifespan of the
gods of abundant fruit is five hundred eons. An ordinary person stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or
the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're
extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a learned
noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person, that is, when there is
a place of rebirth.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.126">

#### [AN 4.126]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Love (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamettāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the pure abodes. This rebirth is
not shared with ordinary people.

Furthermore, a person meditates spreading a heart full of compassion ...
rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of the pure
abodes. This rebirth is not shared with ordinary people.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.127">

#### [AN 4.127]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Incredible Things About the Realized One (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamatathāgataacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, with the appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear. What
four?

When the being intent on awakening passes away from the host of joyful
gods, he's conceived in his mother's womb, mindful and aware. And
then---in this world with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---an immeasurable,
magnificent light appears, surpassing the glory of the gods. Even in the
boundless void of interstellar space---so utterly dark that even the
light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful, makes no
impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the
glory of the gods. And the sentient beings reborn there recognize each
other by that light: 'So, it seems other sentient beings have been
reborn here!' This is the first incredible and amazing thing that
appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the being intent on awakening emerges from his mother's
womb, mindful and aware. And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears ... even in the boundless void of interstellar space ... This is
the second incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance
of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the Realized One understands the supreme perfect awakening.
And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light appears ... even in the
boundless void of interstellar space ... This is the third incredible
and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma.
And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light appears ... even in the
boundless void of interstellar space ... This is the fourth incredible
and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

With the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, these four incredible and amazing things appear."

</article>
<article id="an4.128">

#### [AN 4.128]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Incredible Things About the Realized One (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyatathāgataacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, with the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear.
What four?

People like clinging, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized One
is teaching the Dhamma of non-clinging, they want to listen, they
actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the first
incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a
Realized One.

People like conceit, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized One
is teaching the Dhamma of removing conceit, they want to listen, they
actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the second
incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a
Realized One.

People like excitement, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized
One is teaching the Dhamma of peace, they want to listen, they actively
listen, and they try to understand. This is the third incredible and
amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

This population is lost in ignorance, trapped in their shells. Yet when
a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of removing ignorance, they want
to listen, they actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the
fourth incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of
a Realized One.

With the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear."

</article>
<article id="an4.129">

#### [AN 4.129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Incredible Things About Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandaacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four incredible and amazing things about
Ānanda. What four?

If an assembly of monks goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing
him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've
never had enough.

If an assembly of nuns ... laymen ... or laywomen goes to see Ānanda,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about Ānanda."

</article>
<article id="an4.130">

#### [AN 4.130]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Incredible Things About the Wheel-Turning Monarch ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cakkavattiacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four incredible and amazing things about a
wheel-turning monarch. What four?

If an assembly of aristocrats goes to see a wheel-turning monarch,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

If an assembly of brahmins ... householders ... or ascetics goes to see
a wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by
hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about a wheel-turning
monarch.

In the same way, there are these four incredible and amazing things
about Ānanda. What four?

If an assembly of monks goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing
him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've
never had enough.

If an assembly of nuns ... laymen ... or laywomen goes to see Ānanda,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about Ānanda."

</article>

[]{#an4-puggalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Persons {#an4-puggalavagga.xhtml_an4-puggalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.131">

#### [AN 4.131]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁyojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person hasn't given up the lower fetters, the fetters for
    getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence.
2.  One person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for
    getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence.
3.  One person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for
    getting reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued
    existence.
4.  One person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
    reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence.

What person hasn't given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? A
once-returner. This is the person who hasn't given up the lower fetters,
the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued
existence.

What person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for
getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? One
heading upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

What person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for getting
reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued existence? One
extinguished between one life and the next.

What person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence? A perfected
one.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.132">

#### [AN 4.132]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eloquence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭibhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who speaks on topic, but not fluently.
2.  One who speaks fluently, but not on topic.
3.  One who speaks on topic and fluently.
4.  One who speaks neither on topic nor fluently.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.133">

#### [AN 4.133]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Who Understands Immediately ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ugghaṭitaññūsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? One
who understands immediately, one who understands after detailed
explanation, one who needs education, and one who merely learns by rote.
These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.134">

#### [AN 4.134]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Fruits of Initiative ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uṭṭhānaphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who lives off the fruit of initiative, but not deeds;
2.  one who lives off the fruit of deeds, but not initiative;
3.  one who lives off the fruit of both deeds and initiative;
4.  one who lives off the fruit of neither initiative nor deeds.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.135">

#### [AN 4.135]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāvajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
blameworthy, the mostly blameworthy, the slightly blameworthy, and the
blameless.

And how is a person blameworthy? It's when a person does things by way
of body, speech, and mind that are blameworthy. That's how a person is
blameworthy.

And how is a person mostly blameworthy? It's when a person does things
by way of body, speech, and mind that are mostly blameworthy, but
occasionally blameless. That's how a person is mostly blameworthy.

And how is a person slightly blameworthy? It's when a person does things
by way of body, speech, and mind that are mostly blameless, but
occasionally blameworthy. That's how a person is slightly blameworthy.

And how is a person blameless? It's when a person does things by way of
body, speech, and mind that are blameless. That's how a person is
blameless.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.136">

#### [AN 4.136]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? One
person has not fulfilled ethics, immersion, or wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics, but not immersion or wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics and immersion, but not wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.137">

#### [AN 4.137]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person doesn't value or submit to ethics, immersion, or wisdom.
2.  One person values and submits to ethics, but not to immersion or
    wisdom.
3.  One person values and submits to ethics and immersion, but not
    wisdom.
4.  One person values and submits to ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.138">

#### [AN 4.138]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Retreat ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nikaṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One is on retreat in body, but not mind;
2.  one is on retreat in mind, but not body;
3.  one is on retreat in neither body nor mind; and
4.  one is on retreat in both body and mind.

And how is a person on retreat in body, but not mind? It's when a person
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But they
think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. That's how a person is on
retreat in body, but not mind.

And how is a person on retreat in mind, but not body? It's when a person
doesn't frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But
they think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. That's
how a person is on retreat in mind, but not body.

And how is a person on retreat in neither body nor mind? It's when a
person doesn't frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. And they think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. That's
how a person is on retreat in neither body nor mind.

And how is a person on retreat in both body and mind? It's when a person
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. And they
think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. That's how
a person is on retreat in both body and mind.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.139">

#### [AN 4.139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dhamma Speakers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammakathikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four Dhamma speakers. What four?

One Dhamma speaker speaks little and off topic. And their assembly can't
tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards such
a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks little but stays on topic. And their assembly
can tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards
such a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks much but off topic. And their assembly can't
tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards such
a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks much and stays on topic. And their assembly
can tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards
such a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

These are the four Dhamma speakers."

</article>
<article id="an4.140">

#### [AN 4.140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Speaker ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vādīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four speakers. What four?

1.  There's a speaker who runs out of meaningful things to say, but not
    of ways of phrasing things.
2.  There's a speaker who runs out of ways of phrasing things, but not
    of meaningful things to say.
3.  There's a speaker who runs out of both meaningful things to say, and
    ways of phrasing things.
4.  There's a speaker who never runs out of meaningful things to say, or
    ways of phrasing things.

These are the four speakers. It is impossible, it cannot happen that
someone accomplished in the four kinds of textual analysis will ever run
out of meaningful things to say, or ways of phrasing things."

</article>

[]{#an4-abhavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Brightness {#an4-abhavagga.xhtml_an4-abhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.141">

#### [AN 4.141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Brightness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ābhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of brightness. What four? The
brightness of the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds
of brightness. The best of these four kinds of brightness is the
brightness of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.142">

#### [AN 4.142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Radiance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pabhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of radiance. What four? The
radiance of the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds of
radiance. The best of these four kinds of radiance is the radiance of
wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.143">

#### [AN 4.143]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Light ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ālokasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four lights. What four? The lights of the
moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four lights. The best of
these four lights is the light of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.144">

#### [AN 4.144]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shining ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Obhāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four kinds of shining. What four? The shining of
the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds of shining.
The best of these four kinds of shining is the shining of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.145">

#### [AN 4.145]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lamps ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pajjotasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four lamps. What four? The lamps of the
moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four lamps. The best of these
four lamps is the lamp of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.146">

#### [AN 4.146]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Times (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four times. What four? A time for listening
to the teaching, a time for discussing the teaching, a time for
serenity, and a time for discernment. These are the four times."

</article>
<article id="an4.147">

#### [AN 4.147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Times (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when these four times are rightly developed and progressed,
they gradually lead to the ending of defilements. What four? A time for
listening to the teaching, a time for discussing the teaching, a time
for serenity, and a time for discernment.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean.

In the same way, when these four times are rightly developed and
progressed, they gradually lead to the ending of defilements."

</article>
<article id="an4.148">

#### [AN 4.148]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.
What four? Speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. These
are the four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech."

</article>
<article id="an4.149">

#### [AN 4.149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sucaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of good conduct by way of
speech. What four? Speech that's true, harmonious, gentle, and
thoughtful. These are the four kinds of good conduct by way of speech."

</article>
<article id="an4.150">

#### [AN 4.150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Essentials ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four essentials. What four? Ethics,
immersion, wisdom, and freedom are essentials. These are the four
essentials."

</article>

[]{#an4-catutthapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fourth Fifty {#an4-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an4-catutthapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Faculties {#an4-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an4-indriyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.151">

#### [AN 4.151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faculties ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Indriyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four faculties. What four? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion. These are the four
faculties."

</article>
<article id="an4.152">

#### [AN 4.152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Power of Faith ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhābalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion. These are the four powers."

</article>
<article id="an4.153">

#### [AN 4.153]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Power of Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññābalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the four
powers."

</article>
<article id="an4.154">

#### [AN 4.154]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Power of Mindfulness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Satibalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
mindfulness, immersion, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the
four powers."

</article>
<article id="an4.155">

#### [AN 4.155]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Power of Reflection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭisaṅkhānabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
reflection, development, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the
four powers."

</article>
<article id="an4.156">

#### [AN 4.156]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kappasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an eon contains four uncountable periods. What four?

When an eon contracts, it's not easy to calculate how many years, how
many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it takes.

When an eon remains fully contracted, it's not easy to calculate how
many years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of
years it takes.

When an eon expands, it's not easy to calculate how many years, how many
hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it takes.

When an eon remains fully expanded, it's not easy to calculate how many
years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years
it takes.

These are the four uncountable periods of an eon."

</article>
<article id="an4.157">

#### [AN 4.157]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Illness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are two kinds of illness. What two? Mental and
physical. Some sentient beings are seen who can claim to be free of
physical illness for a year, or two, or three years ... even up to a
hundred years or more. But it's very hard to find any sentient beings in
the world who can claim to be free of mental illness even for an hour,
apart from those who have ended the defilements.

There are four kinds of illness for those gone forth. What four?

To start with, a mendicant has many wishes, is frustrated, and is not
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick.

Because of this, they focus their corrupt wishes on being looked up to,
and on getting material things, honor, and popularity.

They try hard, strive, and make an effort to get these things.

They have an ulterior motive when they visit families. They have an
ulterior motive when they sit down, when they speak on Dhamma, and even
when they hold it in when they need to go to the toilet.

These are the four kinds of illness for those gone forth.

So you should train like this: 'We will not have many wishes or be
frustrated. We will be content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. We won't focus our
corrupt wishes on being looked up to, and on getting material things,
honor, and popularity. We won't try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get these things. We will endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. We will
endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. We will
endure rude and unwelcome criticism. We will put up with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an4.158">

#### [AN 4.158]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parihānisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, any monk or nun who sees four things inside themselves
should conclude: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what
the Buddha calls decline.' What four? They have much greed, much hate,
and much delusion; and their wisdom eye doesn't go into the many deep
matters. Any monk or nun who sees these four things inside themselves
should conclude: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what
the Buddha calls decline.'

Any monk or nun who sees four things inside themselves should conclude:
'My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha
calls non-decline.' What four? Their greed, hate, and delusion grow
less; and their wisdom eye goes into the many deep matters. Any monk or
nun who sees these four things inside themselves should conclude: 'My
skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls
non-decline.'"

</article>
<article id="an4.159">

#### [AN 4.159]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nun ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhikkhunīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

And then a certain nun addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to Master
Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir,
the nun named so-and-so is sick, suffering, and gravely ill. She bows
with her head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please go to the nuns'
quarters to visit that nun out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, ma'am," that man replied. He did as the nun asked. Ānanda
consented with silence.

Then Ānanda robed up and went to the nuns' quarters to visit that nun,
taking his bowl and robe. That nun saw Ānanda coming off in the
distance. She wrapped herself up from head to foot and laid down on her
cot. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to her, and sat down on the seat
spread out. Then Ānanda said to the nun:

"Sister, this body is produced by food. Relying on food, you should give
up food. This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, you
should give up craving. This body is produced by conceit. Relying on
conceit, you should give up conceit. This body is produced by sex. The
Buddha spoke of breaking off everything to do with sex.

'This body is produced by food. Relying on food, you should give up
food.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who
reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' After
some time, relying on food, they give up food. That's why I said what I
said.

'This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, you should give
up craving.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who hears this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.' They think: 'Oh, when will I too realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
...' After some time, relying on craving, they give up craving. That\'s
why I said what I said.

'This body is produced by conceit. Relying on conceit, you should give
up conceit.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who hears this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.' They think: 'Well, that venerable can
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. ... Why can't I?' After some time, relying on conceit, they
give up conceit. That's why I said what I said.

'This body is produced by sex. The Buddha spoke of breaking off
everything to do with sex.'"

Then that nun rose from her cot, placed her robe over one shoulder,
bowed with her head at Ānanda's feet, and said, "I have made a mistake,
sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to act in that way.
Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I can restrain myself
in future."

"Indeed, sister, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to act in that way. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future."

</article>
<article id="an4.160">

#### [AN 4.160]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Training of a Holy One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sugatavinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a Holy One or a Holy One's training remain in the world for
the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world,
for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

And who is a Holy One? It's when a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. This is a Holy
One.

And what is the training of a Holy One? He proclaims a teaching that is
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. This is the training of a Holy One. This is how
a Holy One or a Holy One's training remain in the world for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

These four things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching. What four?

Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned
incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. This is the first
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that
make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take
instruction respectfully. This is the second thing that leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---don't carefully make others recite the discourses. When they
pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to
preserve them. This is the third thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in
backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too become
indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not
rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized. This is the fourth thing that leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

These are four things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the
true teaching.

These four things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What four?

Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that have been learned
correctly, with well placed words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are well placed, the meaning is interpreted correctly. This is
the first thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and
enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that
make them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This is the second thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---carefully make others recite the discourses. When they pass
away, the discourses aren't cut off at the root, and they have someone
to preserve them. This is the third thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are
they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. Those who come after them follow their
example. They too aren't indulgent or slack ... This is the fourth thing
that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

These are four things that lead to the continuation, persistence, and
enduring of the true teaching."

</article>

[]{#an4-patipadavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Practice {#an4-patipadavagga.xhtml_an4-patipadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.161">

#### [AN 4.161]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.162">

#### [AN 4.162]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

And what's the painful practice with slow insight? It's when someone is
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They often feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with slow insight.

And what's the painful practice with swift insight? It's when someone is
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They often feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. And these five
faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with swift insight.

And what's pleasant practice with slow insight? It's when someone is not
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They rarely feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the pleasant practice with slow insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with swift insight? It's when someone
is not ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They rarely
feel the pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These
five faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.163">

#### [AN 4.163]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ugly ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asubhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

And what's the painful practice with slow insight? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established
the perception of their own death. They rely on these five powers of a
trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with slow insight.

And what's the painful practice with swift insight? It's when a
mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established
the perception of their own death. They rely on these five powers of a
trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. And these five
faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with swift insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with slow insight? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five faculties
manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the conditions for
ending the defilements in the present life. This is called the pleasant
practice with slow insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with swift insight? It's when a
mendicant ... enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They rely on
these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. And these five faculties manifest in them strongly: faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they
swiftly attain the conditions for ending the defilements in the present
life. This is called the pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.164">

#### [AN 4.164]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Patient (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four? Impatient
practice, patient practice, taming practice, and calming practice.

And what's the impatient practice? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with you, and you abuse, annoy, or argue right back at them. This
is called the impatient practice.

And what's the patient practice? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with you, and you don't abuse, annoy, or argue back at them. This
is called the patient practice.

And what's the taming practice? When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
restraint over it. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When they
smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with their
tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they know an
idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind,
and achieving restraint over it. This is called the taming practice.

And what's the calming practice? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called the
calming practice.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.165">

#### [AN 4.165]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Patience (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four? Impatient
practice, patient practice, taming practice, and calming practice.

And what's the impatient practice? It's when someone cannot endure cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst. They cannot endure the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. They cannot endure rude and
unwelcome criticism. And they cannot put up with physical pain---sharp,
severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening. This is
called the impatient practice.

And what's the patient practice? It's when someone endures cold, heat,
hunger, and thirst. They endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind,
sun, and reptiles. They endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And they
put up with physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening. This is called the patient practice.

And what's the taming practice? When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. ... When
they hear a sound with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their
nose ... When they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a
touch with their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they
don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind
were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice
restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over
it. This is called the taming practice.

And what's the calming practice? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called the
calming practice.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.166">

#### [AN 4.166]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Both ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ubhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

Of these, the painful practice with slow insight is said to be inferior
in both ways: because it's painful and because it's slow. This practice
is said to be inferior in both ways.

The painful practice with swift insight is said to be inferior because
it's painful.

The pleasant practice with slow insight is said to be inferior because
it's slow.

The pleasant practice with swift insight is said to be superior in both
ways: because it's pleasant, and because it's swift. This practice is
said to be superior in both ways.

These are the four ways of practice."

</article>
<article id="an4.167">

#### [AN 4.167]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Moggallāna's Practice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāmoggallānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Sāriputta sat down to one side and said to Mahāmoggallāna:

"Reverend Moggallāna, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice. Which one of these four ways of
practice did you rely on to free your mind from defilements by not
grasping?"

"Reverend Sāriputta ... I relied on the painful practice with swift
insight to free my mind from defilements by not grasping."

</article>
<article id="an4.168">

#### [AN 4.168]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sāriputta's Practice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāriputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Mahāmoggallāna sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice. Which one of these four ways of
practice did you rely on to free your mind from defilements by not
grasping?"

"Reverend Moggallāna ... I relied on the pleasant practice with swift
insight to free my mind from defilements by not grasping."

</article>
<article id="an4.169">

#### [AN 4.169]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extra Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sasaṅkhārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person becomes fully quenched in the present life by making
    extra effort.
2.  One person becomes fully quenched when the body breaks up by making
    extra effort.
3.  One person becomes fully quenched in the present life without making
    extra effort.
4.  One person becomes fully quenched when the body breaks up without
    making extra effort.

And how does a person become fully quenched in the present life by
making extra effort? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the
ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives
dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all
conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death.
They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom. And these five faculties manifest in them
strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of
the strength of the five faculties, they become fully quenched in the
present life by making extra effort. That's how a person becomes fully
quenched in the present life by making extra effort.

How does a person become fully quenched when the body breaks up by
making extra effort? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the
ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives
dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all
conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death.
They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five faculties manifest in them
weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of
the weakness of the five faculties, they become fully quenched when the
body breaks up by making extra effort. That's how a person becomes fully
quenched when the body breaks up by making extra effort.

And how does a person become fully quenched in the present life without
making extra effort? It's when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the
first absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. And these five faculties
manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. Because of the strength of the five faculties, they become fully
quenched in the present life without making extra effort. That's how a
person becomes fully quenched in the present life without making extra
effort.

And how does a person become fully quenched when the body breaks up
without making extra effort? It's when a mendicant ... enters and
remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption ... They rely on these five powers of a
trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of the weakness of the five faculties,
they become fully quenched when the body breaks up without making extra
effort. That's how a person becomes fully quenched when the body breaks
up without making extra effort.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.170">

#### [AN 4.170]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Conjunction ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yuganaddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. There Ānanda addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, all of the monks and nuns who declare in my presence that
they have attained perfection, did so by one or other of four paths.

What four?

Take a mendicant who develops serenity before discernment. As they do
so, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of
it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

Another mendicant develops discernment before serenity. As they do so,
the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it.
By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

Another mendicant develops serenity and discernment in conjunction. As
they do so, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make
much of it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the
underlying tendencies.

Another mendicant's mind is seized by restlessness to realize the
teaching. But there comes a time when their mind is stilled internally;
it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. The path is born
in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they
give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

All of the monks and nuns who declare in my presence that they have
attained perfection, did so by one or other of these four paths."

</article>

[]{#an4-sancetaniyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Intention {#an4-sancetaniyavagga.xhtml_an4-sancetaniyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.171">

#### [AN 4.171]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Intention ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, as long as there's a body, the intention that gives rise to
bodily action causes pleasure and pain to arise in oneself. As long as
there's a voice, the intention that gives rise to verbal action causes
pleasure and pain to arise in oneself. As long as there's a mind, the
intention that gives rise to mental action causes pleasure and pain to
arise in oneself. But these only apply when conditioned by ignorance.

By oneself one makes the choice that gives rise to bodily, verbal, and
mental action, conditioned by which that pleasure and pain arise in
oneself. Or else others make the choice ... One consciously makes the
choice ... Or else one unconsciously makes the choice ...

Ignorance is included in all these things. But when ignorance fades away
and ceases with nothing left over, there is no body and no voice and no
mind, conditioned by which that pleasure and pain arise in oneself.
There is no field, no ground, no scope, and no basis, conditioned by
which that pleasure and pain arise in oneself.

Mendicants, there are four kinds of reincarnation in a life-form. What
four?

1.  There is reincarnation in a life-form where one's own intention is
    effective, not that of others.
2.  There is reincarnation in a life-form where the intention of others
    is effective, not one's own.
3.  There is reincarnation in a life-form where both one's own and
    others' intentions are effective.
4.  There is reincarnation in a life-form where neither one's own nor
    others' intentions are effective.

These are the four kinds of reincarnation in a life-form."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. Take the case of the reincarnation in a life-form where
one's own intention is effective, not that of others. Those sentient
beings pass away from that realm due to their own intention. Take the
case of the reincarnation in a life-form where the intention of others
is effective, not one's own. Those sentient beings pass away from that
realm due to the intention of others. Take the case of the reincarnation
in a life-form where both one's own and others' intentions are
effective. Those sentient beings pass away from that realm due to both
their own and others' intentions. But sir, in the case of the
reincarnation in a life-form where neither one's own nor others'
intentions are effective, what kind of gods does this refer to?"

"Sāriputta, it refers to the gods reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings
pass away from that realm as returners who come back to this place,
while others are non-returners who don't come back?"

"Sāriputta, take a person who hasn't given up the lower fetters. In the
present life they enter and abide in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If
they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often
without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the
gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. When
they pass away from there, they're a returner, who comes back to this
place.

Sāriputta, take a person who has given up the lower fetters. In the
present life they enter and abide in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If
they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often
without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the
gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. When
they pass away from there, they're a non-returner, not coming back to
this place.

This is the cause, this is the reason why some sentient beings pass away
from that realm as returners who come back to this place, while others
are non-returners who don't come back."

</article>
<article id="an4.172">

#### [AN 4.172]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sāriputta's Attainment of Textual Analysis ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vibhattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, I realized the textual analysis of the meaning---piece by
piece and expression by expression---a fortnight after I ordained. In
many ways I explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and
reveal it. Whoever has any doubt or uncertainty, let them ask me, I will
answer. Our teacher is present, he who is so very skilled in our
teachings.

I realized the textual analysis of the text---piece by piece and
expression by expression---a fortnight after I ordained. ...

I realized the textual analysis of terminology---piece by piece and
expression by expression---a fortnight after I ordained. ...

I realized the textual analysis of eloquence---piece by piece and
expression by expression---a fortnight after I ordained. In many ways I
explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal it. If
anyone has any doubt or uncertainty, let them ask me, I will answer. Our
teacher is present, he who is so very skilled in our teachings."

</article>
<article id="an4.173">

#### [AN 4.173]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahākoṭṭhita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahākoṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Mahākoṭṭhita sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend, when the six fields of contact have faded away and ceased
with nothing left over, does something else still exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else both still exist and no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else neither still exist nor no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Reverend, when asked whether---when the six fields of contact have
faded away and ceased with nothing left over---something else still
exists, you say 'don't put it like that'. When asked whether something
else no longer exists, you say 'don't put it like that'. When asked
whether something else both still exists and no longer exists, you say
'don't put it like that'. When asked whether something else neither
still exists nor no longer exists, you say 'don't put it like that'. How
then should we see the meaning of this statement?"

"If you say that, 'When the six fields of contact have faded away and
ceased with nothing left over, something else still exists', you're
proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that 'something else no
longer exists', you're proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that
'something else both still exists and no longer exists', you're
proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that 'something else
neither still exists nor no longer exists', you're proliferating the
unproliferated. The scope of proliferation extends as far as the scope
of the six fields of contact. The scope of the six fields of contact
extends as far as the scope of proliferation. When the six fields of
contact fade away and cease with nothing left over, proliferation stops
and is stilled."

</article>
<article id="an4.174">

#### [AN 4.174]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Mahākoṭṭhita:

"Reverend, when these six fields of contact have faded away and ceased
with nothing left over, does something else exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else both still exist and no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Does something else neither still exist nor no longer exist?"

"Don't put it like that, reverend."

"Reverend, when asked these questions, you say 'don't put it like that'.
... How then should we see the meaning of this statement?"

"If you say that 'when the six fields of contact have faded away and
ceased with nothing left over, something else exists', you're
proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that 'something else no
longer exists', you're proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that
'something else both still exists and no longer exists', you're
proliferating the unproliferated. If you say that 'something else
neither still exists nor no longer exists', you're proliferating the
unproliferated. The scope of proliferation extends as far as the scope
of the six fields of contact. The scope of the six fields of contact
extends as far as the scope of proliferation. When the six fields of
contact fade away and cease with nothing left over, proliferation stops
and is stilled."

</article>
<article id="an4.175">

#### [AN 4.175]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Upavāṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upavāṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Upavāna went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Upavāna sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, do you become a terminator because of knowledge?"

"That's not it, reverend."

"Do you become a terminator because of conduct?"

"That's not it, reverend."

"Do you become a terminator because of both knowledge and conduct?"

"That's not it, reverend."

"Do you become a terminator for some reason other than knowledge and
conduct?"

"That's not it, reverend."

"Reverend Sāriputta, when asked whether you become a terminator because
of knowledge or conduct or knowledge and conduct, or for some other
reason, you say 'that's not it'. How then do you become a terminator?"

"Reverend, if you became a terminator because of knowledge, then even
someone who still has fuel for grasping could be a terminator. If you
became a terminator because of conduct, then even someone who still has
fuel for grasping could be a terminator. If you became a terminator
because of both knowledge and conduct, then even someone who still has
fuel for grasping could be a terminator. If you became a terminator for
some reason other than knowledge and conduct, then even an ordinary
person could be a terminator. For an ordinary person lacks knowledge and
conduct. Reverend, someone lacking good conduct does not know and see
things as they are. Someone accomplished in good conduct knows and sees
things as they are. Knowing and seeing things as they are, one is a
terminator."

</article>
<article id="an4.176">

#### [AN 4.176]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Aspiration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āyācanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a faithful monk would rightly aspire: 'May I be like
Sāriputta and Moggallāna!' These are a standard and a measure for my
monk disciples, that is, Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

A faithful nun would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the nuns Khemā and
Uppalavaṇṇā!' These are a standard and a measure for my nun disciples,
that is, the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā.

A faithful layman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the householder
Citta and Hatthaka of Ãḷavī!' These are a standard and a measure for my
male lay disciples, that is, the householder Citta and Hatthaka of
Ãḷavī.

A faithful laywoman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the laywomen
Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother!' These are a standard and a
measure for my female lay disciples, that is, the laywomen Khujjuttarā
and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother."

</article>
<article id="an4.177">

#### [AN 4.177]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Rāhula ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rāhulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Rāhula went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Rāhula, the interior earth element and the exterior earth element are
just the earth element. This should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.' When you truly see with right understanding, you grow
disillusioned with the earth element, detaching the mind from the earth
element.

The interior water element and the exterior water element are just the
water element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like
this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you
truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the
water element, detaching the mind from the water element.

The interior fire element and the exterior fire element are just the
fire element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like
this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you
truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire
element, detaching the mind from the fire element.

The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air
element. This should be truly seen with right understanding like this:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' When you truly
see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air
element, detaching the mind from the air element.

When a mendicant sees these four elements as neither self nor belonging
to self, they're called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the
fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering."

</article>
<article id="an4.178">

#### [AN 4.178]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Billabong ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jambālīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release of the
heart. They focus on the cessation of substantial reality, but on that
their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. You wouldn't expect that mendicant to realize the cessation of
substantial reality. Suppose a person were to grab a branch with a
glue-smeared hand. Their hand would stick, hold, and bind to it. In the
same way, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release
of the heart. They focus on the cessation of substantial reality, but on
that their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and
become decided. You wouldn't expect that mendicant to realize the
cessation of substantial reality.

Next, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release of
the heart. They focus on the cessation of substantial reality, and on
that their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes
decided. You would expect that mendicant to realize the cessation of
substantial reality. Suppose a person were to grab a branch with a clean
hand. Their hand wouldn't stick, hold, or bind to it. In the same way,
take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release of the
heart. They focus on the cessation of substantial reality, and on that
their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes
decided. You would expect that mendicant to realize the cessation of
substantial reality.

Next, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release of
the heart. They focus on smashing ignorance, but on that their mind does
not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided. You
wouldn't expect that mendicant to smash ignorance. Suppose there was a
billabong that had been stagnant for many years. And someone was to
close off the inlets and open up the drains, and the heavens didn't
provide enough rain. You wouldn't expect that billabong to break its
banks. In the same way, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a
certain peaceful release of the heart. They focus on smashing ignorance,
but on that their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided. You wouldn't expect that mendicant to smash
ignorance.

Next, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a peaceful release of
the heart. They focus on smashing ignorance, and on that their mind
leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. You
would expect that mendicant to smash ignorance. Suppose there was a
billabong that had been stagnant for many years. And someone was to open
up the inlets and close off the drains, and the heavens provided plenty
of rain. You would expect that billabong to break its banks. In the same
way, take a mendicant who enters and remains in a certain peaceful
release of the heart. They focus on smashing ignorance, and on that
their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes
decided. You would expect that mendicant to smash ignorance.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.179">

#### [AN 4.179]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"What is the cause, Reverend Sāriputta, what is the reason why some
sentient beings aren't fully quenched in the present life?"

"Reverend Ānanda, it's because some sentient beings don't really
understand which perceptions make things worse, which keep things
steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to penetration. That's
the cause, that's the reason why some sentient beings aren't fully
quenched in the present life."

"What is the cause, Reverend Sāriputta, what is the reason why some
sentient beings are fully quenched in the present life?"

"Reverend Ānanda, it's because some sentient beings truly understand
which perceptions make things worse, which keep things steady, which
lead to distinction, and which lead to penetration. That's the cause,
that's the reason why some sentient beings are fully quenched in the
present life."

</article>
<article id="an4.180">

#### [AN 4.180]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Four Great References ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāpadesasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near the city of Bhoga, at the Ānanda
Tree-shrine.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied.

The Buddha said this: "Mendicants, I will teach you the four great
references. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, what are the four great references?

Take a mendicant who says: 'Reverend, I have heard and learned this in
the presence of the Buddha: this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized
those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse
and are exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse
and are not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion:
'Clearly this is not the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by that
mendicant.' And so you should reject it.

Take another mendicant who says: 'Reverend, I have heard and learned
this in the presence of the Buddha: this is the teaching, this is the
training, this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve
nor dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully
memorized those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the
discourse and are exhibited in the training. If they fit in the
discourse and are exhibited in the training, you should draw the
conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Blessed One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that
mendicant.' You should remember it. This is the first great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery lives a
Saṅgha with seniors and leaders. I've heard and learned this in the
presence of that Saṅgha: this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized
those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse
and are exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse
and are not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion:
'Clearly this is not the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by that
Saṅgha.' And so you should reject it.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery lives a
Saṅgha with seniors and leaders. I've heard and learned this in the
presence of that Saṅgha: this is the teaching, this is the training,
this is the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized
those words and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse
and are exhibited in the training. If they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this
is the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that Saṅgha.' You should
remember it. This is the second great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there are
several senior mendicants who are very learned, inheritors of the
heritage, who remember the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines. I've heard and learned this in the presence of those senior
mendicants: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is the
Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly
this is not the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by those senior
mendicants.' And so you should reject it.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there are
several senior mendicants who are very learned, inheritors of the
heritage, who remember the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines. I've heard and learned this in the presence of those senior
mendicants: this is the teaching, this is the monastic law, this is the
Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this
is the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by those senior mendicants.' You
should remember it. This is the third great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there is a
single senior mendicant who is very learned, an inheritor of the
heritage, who has memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines. I've heard and learned this in the presence of that senior
mendicant: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is the
Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly
this is not the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by that senior
mendicant.' And so you should reject it.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there is a
single senior mendicant who is very learned, an inheritor of the
heritage, who has memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines. I've heard and learned this in the presence of that senior
mendicant: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is the
Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this
is the word of the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that senior mendicant.' You
should remember it. This is the fourth great reference.

These are the four great references."

</article>

[]{#an4-brahmanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Brahmins {#an4-brahmanavagga.xhtml_an4-brahmanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.181">

#### [AN 4.181]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Warrior ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yodhājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a warrior with four factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What four? He's
skilled in the basics, a long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who
shatters large objects. A warrior with these four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? He's skilled in the basics, a
long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who shatters large objects.

And how is a mendicant skilled in the basics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault,
they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
skilled in the basics.

And how is a mendicant a long-distance shooter? It's when a mendicant
truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal
or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.' They truly see any kind of feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' That's how a mendicant is a long-distance
shooter.

And how is a mendicant a marksman? It's when they truly understand:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is a marksman.

And how does a mendicant shatter large objects? It's when a mendicant
shatters the great mass of ignorance. That's how a mendicant shatters
large objects.

A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.182">

#### [AN 4.182]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Guarantee ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāṭibhogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are four things that no-one can guarantee---not an ascetic, a
brahmin, a god, a Māra, a Brahmā, or anyone in the world.

What four? No-one can guarantee that someone liable to old age will not
grow old. No-one can guarantee that someone liable to sickness will not
get sick. No-one can guarantee that someone liable to death will not
die. No-one can guarantee that the bad deeds done in past
lives---corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in
suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death---will not produce
their result.

These are the four things that no-one can guarantee---not an ascetic, a
brahmin, a god, a Māra, a Brahmā, or anyone in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.183">

#### [AN 4.183]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vassakāra on What is Heard ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sutasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove,
the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a minister of
Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side
and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, this is my doctrine and view: There's nothing wrong with
talking about what you've seen, saying: 'So I have seen.' There's
nothing wrong with talking about what you've heard, saying: 'So I have
heard.' There's nothing wrong with talking about what you've thought,
saying: 'So I have thought.' There's nothing wrong with talking about
what you've known, saying: 'So I have known.'"

"Brahmin, I don't say you should talk about everything you see, hear,
think, and know. But I also don't say you should talk about nothing you
see, hear, think, and know.

When talking about certain things you've seen, heard, thought, or known,
unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline. I say that
you shouldn't talk about those things. When talking about other things
you've seen, heard, thought, or known, unskillful qualities decline
while skillful qualities grow. I say that you should talk about those
things."

Then Vassakāra the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said, got up from his seat and left.

</article>
<article id="an4.184">

#### [AN 4.184]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fearless ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, this is my doctrine and view: 'All those liable to death
are frightened and terrified of death.'"

"Brahmin, some of those liable to death are frightened and terrified of
death. But some of those liable to death are not frightened and
terrified of death.

Who are those frightened of death? It's someone who isn't free of greed,
desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
When they fall seriously ill, they think: 'The sensual pleasures that I
love so much will leave me, and I'll leave them.' They sorrow and wail
and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is
someone who is frightened of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who isn't free of greed, desire, fondness,
thirst, passion, and craving for the body. When they fall seriously ill,
they think: 'This body that I love so much will leave me, and I'll leave
it.' They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling
into confusion. This, too, is someone who is frightened of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who hasn't done good and skillful things that
keep them safe, but has done bad, violent, and depraved things. When
they fall seriously ill, they think: 'Well, I haven't done good and
skillful things that keep me safe. And I have done bad, violent, and
depraved things. When I depart, I'll go to the place where people who've
done such things go.' They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their
breast and falling into confusion. This, too, is someone who is
frightened of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who's doubtful, uncertain, and undecided about
the true teaching. When they fall seriously ill, they think: 'I'm
doubtful, uncertain, and undecided about the true teaching.' They sorrow
and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.
This, too, is someone who is frightened of death. These are the four
people liable to death who are frightened and terrified of death.

Who are those not frightened of death?

It's someone who is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. When they fall seriously ill, they don't
think: 'The sensual pleasures that I love so much will leave me, and
I'll leave them.' They don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their
breast and falling into confusion. This is someone who's not frightened
of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for the body. When they fall seriously ill, they
don't think: 'This body that I love so much will leave me, and I'll
leave it.' They don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast
and falling into confusion. This, too, is someone who's not frightened
of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who hasn't done bad, violent, and corrupt
deeds, but has done good and skillful deeds that keep them safe. When
they fall seriously ill, they think: 'Well, I haven't done bad, violent,
and depraved things. And I have done good and skillful deeds that keep
me safe. When I depart, I'll go to the place where people who've done
such things go.' They don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their
breast and falling into confusion. This, too, is someone who's not
frightened of death.

Furthermore, it's someone who's not doubtful, uncertain, or undecided
about the true teaching. When they fall seriously ill, they think: 'I'm
not doubtful, uncertain, or undecided about the true teaching.' They
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This, too, is someone who's not frightened of death.

These are the four people liable to death who are not frightened and
terrified of death."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an4.185">

#### [AN 4.185]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Truths of the Brahmins ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brāhmaṇasaccasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Once the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.

Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the
monastery of the wanderers on the bank of the Sappinī river. They
included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known
wanderers.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the wanderer's monastery on the bank of the Sappinī river.

Now at that time this discussion came up while those wanderers of other
religions were sitting together, "The truths of the brahmins are like
this; the truths of the brahmins are like that."

Then the Buddha went up to those wanderers, sat down on the seat spread
out, and said to them, "Wanderers, what were you sitting talking about
just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were
sitting together: 'The truths of the brahmins are like this; the truths
of the brahmins are like that.'"

"Wanderers, I declare these four truths of the brahmins, having realized
them with my own insight. What four?

Take a brahmin who says: 'No sentient beings should be killed.' Saying
this, a brahmin speaks the truth, not lies. But they don't think of
themselves as an 'ascetic' or 'brahmin' because of that. Nor do they
think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'. Rather, they simply
practice out of kindness and sympathy for living creatures, having had
insight into the truth of that.

Take another brahmin who says: 'All sensual pleasures are impermanent,
suffering, and perishable.' Saying this, a brahmin speaks the truth, not
lies. But they don't think of themselves as an 'ascetic' or 'brahmin'
because of that. Nor do they think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm
worse'. Rather, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion,
and cessation regarding sensual pleasures, having had insight into the
truth of that.

Take another brahmin who says: 'All states of existence are impermanent,
suffering, and perishable.' ... They simply practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives,
having had insight into the truth of that.

Take another brahmin who says: 'I don't belong to anyone anywhere. And
nothing belongs to me anywhere.' Saying this, a brahmin speaks the
truth, not lies. But they don't think of themselves as an 'ascetic' or
'brahmin' because of that. Nor do they think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal'
or 'I'm worse'. Rather, they simply practice the path of nothingness,
having had insight into the truth of that.

These are the four truths of the brahmins that I declare, having
realized them with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.186">

#### [AN 4.186]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Approach ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ummaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then one of the mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what leads the world on? What drags it around? What arises and
takes control?"

"Good, good, mendicant! Your approach and articulation are excellent,
and it's a good question. For you asked: 'What leads the world on? What
drags it around? What arises and takes control?'"

"Yes, sir."

"Mendicant, the mind leads the world on. The mind drags it around. When
the mind arises, it takes control."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"Sir, they speak of 'a learned memorizer of the teaching'. How is a
learned memorizer of the teaching defined?"

"Good, good, mendicant! Your approach and articulation are excellent,
and it's a good question. ... I have taught many teachings: statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But
if anyone understands the meaning and the text of even a four-line
verse, and if they practice in line with that teaching, they're
qualified to be called a 'learned memorizer of the teaching'."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"Sir, they speak of 'a learned person with penetrating wisdom'. How is a
learned person with penetrating wisdom defined?"

"Good, good, mendicant! Your approach and articulation are excellent,
and it's a good question. ... Take a mendicant who has heard: 'This is
suffering.' They see what it means with penetrating wisdom. They've
heard: 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' They see what it means with penetrating wisdom. That's how a
person is learned, with penetrating wisdom."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"Sir, they speak of 'an astute person with great wisdom'. How is an
astute person with great wisdom defined?"

"Good, good, mendicant! Your approach and articulation are excellent,
and it's a good question. ... An astute person with great wisdom is one
who has no intention to hurt themselves, or to hurt others, or to hurt
both. When they think, they only think of the benefit for themselves,
for others, for both, and for the whole world. That's how a person is
astute, with great wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.187">

#### [AN 4.187]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vassakāra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vassakārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove,
the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a chief minister of Magadha, went up to the
Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, could an untrue person know of an untrue person: 'This
fellow is an untrue person'?"

"That's impossible, brahmin, it can't happen."

"Could an untrue person know of a true person: 'This fellow is a true
person'?"

"That too is impossible, it can't happen."

"Mister Gotama, could a true person know of a true person: 'This fellow
is a true person'?"

"That, brahmin, is possible."

"Could a true person know of an untrue person: 'This fellow is an untrue
person'?"

"That too is possible."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how well said this was by
Mister Gotama: 'It's impossible, it can't happen, that an untrue person
could know ... But it is possible that a true person could know ...'

Once, members of the brahmin Todeyya's assembly were going on
complaining about others: 'This King Eḷeyya is a fool to be so devoted
to the ascetic Rāmaputta. He even shows him the utmost deference by
bowing down to him, rising up for him, greeting him with joined palms,
and observing proper etiquette for him. And these king's men are fools
too---Yamaka, Moggalla, Ugga, Nāvindakī, Gandhabba, and Aggivessa---for
they show the same kind of deference to Rāmaputta.' Then the brahmin
Todeyya reasoned with them like this: 'What do the good sirs think? When
it comes to the various duties and speeches, isn't King Eḷeyya astute,
even better than the experts?' 'That's true, sir.'

'It's because the ascetic Rāmaputta is even more astute and expert than
King Eḷeyya that the king is so devoted to him. That's why he even shows
Rāmaputta the utmost deference by bowing down to him, rising up for him,
greeting him with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for him.

'What do the good sirs think? When it comes to the various duties and
speeches, aren't the king's men---Yamaka, Moggalla, Ugga, Nāvindakī,
Gandhabba, and Aggivessa---astute, even better than the experts?'
'That's true, sir.'

'It's because Rāmaputta is even more astute and expert than the king's
men that they have such devotion to him. ... It's because Rāmaputta is
even more astute and expert than King Eḷeyya that the king is so devoted
to him. That's why he even shows Rāmaputta the utmost deference by
bowing down to him, rising up for him, greeting him with joined palms,
and observing proper etiquette for him.'

It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how well said this was by
Mister Gotama: 'It's impossible, it can't happen, that an untrue person
could know ... But it is possible that a true person could know ...
Well, now, Mister Gotama, I must go. I have many duties, and much to
do."

"Please, brahmin, go at your convenience."

Then Vassakāra the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said, got up from his seat and left.

</article>
<article id="an4.188">

#### [AN 4.188]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Upaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Once the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain. Then Upaka the son of Maṇḍikā went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, this is my doctrine and view: 'Whoever goes on complaining about
others without giving any reasons is reprehensible and at fault.'"

"Upaka, if someone goes on complaining about others without giving a
reason, they're reprehensible and at fault. But that's what you do, so
you're reprehensible and at fault!"

"Sir, like a fish caught in a big trap just as it rises, so the Buddha
caught me in a big trap of words just as I rose up."

"Upaka, I've declared: 'This is unskillful.' And there are limitless
words, phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: 'This is
another way of saying that this is unskillful.' I've declared: 'The
unskillful should be given up.' And there are limitless words, phrases,
and teachings of the Realized One about that: 'This is another way of
saying that the unskillful should be given up.'

I've declared that: 'This is skillful.' And there are limitless words,
phrases, and teachings of the Realized One about that: 'This is another
way of saying that this is skillful.' I've declared: 'The skillful
should be developed.' And there are limitless words, phrases, and
teachings of the Realized One about that: 'This is another way of saying
that the skillful should be developed.'"

And then Upaka son of Maṇḍikā approved and agreed with what the Buddha
said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went up to King Ajātasattu of
Magadha, son of the princess of Videha,. He told the King of all they
had discussed.

But Ajātasattu became angry and upset, and said to Upaka, "How rude of
this salt-maker's boy! How scurrilous and impudent of him to imagine he
could attack the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha! Get out, Upaka, go away! Don't let me see you again."

</article>
<article id="an4.189">

#### [AN 4.189]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things to be Realized ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sacchikaraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things should be realized. What four?

There are things to be realized with direct meditative experience. There
are things to be realized with recollection. There are things to be
realized with vision. There are things to be realized with wisdom.

What things are to be realized with direct meditative experience? The
eight liberations.

What things are to be realized with recollection? Past lives.

What things are to be realized with vision? The passing away and rebirth
of sentient beings.

What things are to be realized with wisdom? The ending of defilements.

These are the four things to be realized."

</article>
<article id="an4.190">

#### [AN 4.190]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse
of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting
surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. Then the Buddha looked around the
Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed them:

"This assembly has no chaff, mendicants, it is free of chaff, pure, and
consolidated in the core. Such is this Saṅgha of mendicants, such is
this assembly! An assembly such as this is rarely seen in the world. An
assembly such as this is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world. For an assembly such as this, giving little becomes much, while
giving much becomes even more. An assembly such as this is worth
traveling many leagues to see, even if you have to carry your own
provisions in a knapsack.

There are mendicants staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to the
gods. There are mendicants staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to
Brahmā. There are mendicants staying in this Saṅgha who have attained to
the imperturbable. There are mendicants staying in this Saṅgha who have
attained to nobility.

And how has a mendicant attained to the gods? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... As the placing
of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain
in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ...
That's how a mendicant has attained to the gods.

And how has a mendicant attained to Brahmā? Firstly, a mendicant
meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of
compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. That's how a mendicant has attained to Brahmā.

And how has a mendicant attained to the imperturbable? It's when a
mendicant---going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity---aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', he enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going totally beyond
the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', he enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, he enters and remains in
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. That's how a
mendicant has attained to the imperturbable.

And how has a mendicant attained to nobility? It's when they truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant has
attained to nobility."

</article>

[]{#an4-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an4-mahavagga.xhtml_an4-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.191">

#### [AN 4.191]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Followed by Ear ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sotānugatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you can expect four benefits when the teachings have been
followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the mind, and well comprehended
theoretically. What four?

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They've followed those
teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them by the mind, and well
comprehended them theoretically. But they die unmindful and are reborn
in one of the orders of gods. Being happy there, passages of the
teaching come back to them. Memory comes up slowly, but then that being
quickly reaches distinction. This is the first benefit you can expect
when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the
mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. Though they're
happy there, passages of the teaching don't come back to them. However,
a mendicant with psychic powers, who has achieved mastery of the mind,
teaches Dhamma to the assembly of gods. They think: 'I used to lead the
spiritual life in this same teaching and training.' Memory comes up
slowly, but then that being quickly reaches distinction. Suppose a
person was skilled in the sound of drums. While traveling along a road
they hear the sound of drums. They wouldn't have any doubts or
uncertainties about whether that was the sound of drums or not. They'd
just conclude, 'That's the sound of drums.' In the same way, take a
mendicant who memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are
reborn in one of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but
then that being quickly reaches distinction. This is the second benefit
you can expect when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed,
examined by the mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. But passages of
the teaching don't come back to them when they're happy, nor does a
mendicant with psychic powers ... teach Dhamma to the assembly of gods.
However, a god teaches Dhamma to the assembly of gods. They think: 'I
used to lead the spiritual life in this same teaching and training.'
Memory comes up slowly, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
Suppose a person was skilled in the sound of horns. While traveling
along a road they hear the sound of horns. They wouldn't have any doubt
about whether that was the sound of horns or not. They'd just conclude,
'That's the sound of horns.' In the same way, take a mendicant who
memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are reborn in one
of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but then that being
quickly reaches distinction. This is the third benefit you can expect
when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the
mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. But passages of
the teaching don't come back to them when they're happy, and neither a
mendicant with psychic powers ... nor a god teaches Dhamma to the
assembly of gods. But a being who has been reborn spontaneously reminds
another such being: 'Do you remember, good sir? Do you remember where we
used to lead the spiritual life?' He says: 'I remember, good sir, I
remember!' Memory comes up slowly, but then that being quickly reaches
distinction. Suppose there were two friends who had played together in
the sand. Some time or other they'd meet. And one friend would say to
the other: 'Do you remember this, friend? Do you remember that, friend?'
They'd say: 'I remember, friend, I remember!' In the same way, take a
mendicant who memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are
reborn in one of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but
then that being quickly reaches distinction. This is the fourth benefit
you can expect when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed,
examined by the mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

You can expect these four benefits when the teachings have been followed
by ear, rehearsed, examined by the mind, and well comprehended
theoretically."

</article>
<article id="an4.192">

#### [AN 4.192]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Facts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things can be known in four situations. What
four?

You can get to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only
after a long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when
inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.

You can get to know a person's purity by dealing with them. ...

You can get to know a person's resilience in times of trouble. ...

You can get to know a person's wisdom by discussion. But only after a
long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.

'You can get to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only
after a long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when
inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Take a person who's living with someone else. They
come to know: 'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been broken,
tainted, spotty, and marred. Their deeds and behavior are inconsistent.
This venerable is unethical, not ethical.'

Take another person who's living with someone else. They come to know:
'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been intact, impeccable,
spotless, and unmarred. Their deeds and behavior are consistent. This
venerable is ethical, not unethical.' That's why I said that you can get
to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only after a long
time, not a short time; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.

'You can get to know a person's purity by dealing with them. ...' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? Take a person who has dealings with
someone else. They come to know: 'This venerable deals with one person
in one way. Then they deal with two, three, or many people each in
different ways. They're not consistent from one deal to the next. This
venerable's dealings are impure, not pure.'

Take another person who has dealings with someone else. They come to
know: 'This venerable deals with one person in one way. Then they deal
with two, three, or many people each in the same way. They're consistent
from one deal to the next. This venerable's dealings are pure, not
impure.' That's why I said that you can get to know a person's purity by
dealing with them. ...

'You can get to know a person's resilience in times of trouble. ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a person who experiences
loss of family, wealth, or health. But they don't reflect: 'Worldly life
is like that. Reincarnation in a life-form is like that. That's why the
eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world
revolves around the eight worldly conditions: gain and loss, fame and
disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure and pain.' They sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

Take another person who experiences loss of family, wealth, or health.
But they reflect: 'Worldly life is like that. Reincarnation in a
life-form is like that. That's why the eight worldly conditions revolve
around the world, and the world revolves around the eight worldly
conditions: gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure
and pain.' They don't sorrow or wail or lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. That's why I said that you can get to know a
person's resilience in times of trouble. ...

'You can get to know a person's wisdom by discussion. But only after a
long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.' That's what I said, but why did I
say it? Take a person who is discussing with someone else. They come to
know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what they're getting at,
and by how they discuss a question, they're witless, not wise. Why is
that? This venerable does not bring up a deep and meaningful saying that
is peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible
to the astute. When this venerable speaks on Dhamma they're not able to
explain the meaning, either briefly or in detail. They can't teach it,
assert it, establish it, clarify it, analyze it, or reveal it. This
venerable is witless, not wise.'

Suppose a person with clear eyes was standing on the bank of a lake.
They'd see a little fish rising, and think: 'Judging by this fish's
approach, by the ripples it makes, and by its force, it's a little fish,
not a big one.' In the same way, a person who is discussing with someone
else would come to know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what
they're getting at, and by how they discuss a question, they're witless,
not wise. ...'

Take another person who is discussing with someone else. They come to
know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what they're getting at,
and by how they discuss a question, they're wise, not witless. Why is
that? This venerable brings up a deep and meaningful saying that is
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute. When this venerable speaks on Dhamma they're able to explain
the meaning, either briefly or in detail. They teach it, assert it,
establish it, clarify it, analyze it, and reveal it. This venerable is
wise, not witless.'

Suppose a man with clear eyes was standing on the bank of a lake. He'd
see a big fish rising, and think: 'Judging by this fish's approach, by
the ripples it makes, and by its force, it's a big fish, not a little
one.' In the same way, a person who is discussing with someone else
would come to know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what
they're getting at, and by how they articulate a question, they're wise,
not witless. ...'

That's why I said that you can get to know a person's wisdom by
discussion. But only after a long time, not casually; only when
attentive, not when inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.

These are the four things that can be known in four situations."

</article>
<article id="an4.193">

#### [AN 4.193]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bhaddiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaddiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then Bhaddiya the Licchavi went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'The ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a
conversion magic, and uses it to convert the disciples of those of other
religions.' I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has
said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation
in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal
and criticism?"

"Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by lineage,
don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't rely on
logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of thought,
don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't go by the
appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our respected
teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does greed come up in a person for their
welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A greedy individual---overcome by greed---kills living creatures,
steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is
that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does hate ... or delusion ... or
aggression come up in a person for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"An aggressive individual kills living creatures, steals, commits
adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their
lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, Bhaddiya, when we said: 'Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, Bhaddiya, don't rely on oral transmission ... But when you know
for yourselves: 'These things are skillful, blameless, praised by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness', then you should acquire them and keep them.

What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does contentment ... love ... understanding
... benevolence come up in a person for their welfare or harm?"

"Welfare, sir."

"An individual who is benevolent---not overcome by aggression---doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others
to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, Bhaddiya, when we said: 'Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible
people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness", then you should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

The true persons in the world encourage their disciples: 'Please,
mister, live rid of greed. Then you won't act out of greed by way of
body, speech, or mind. Live rid of hate ... delusion ... aggression.
Then you won't act out of hate ... delusion ... aggression by way of
body, speech, or mind."

When he said this, Bhaddiya the Licchavi said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"Well, Bhaddiya, did I say to you: 'Please, Bhaddiya, be my disciple,
and I will be your teacher'?"

"No, sir."

"Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins
misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:
'The ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a conversion magic, and uses
it to convert the disciples of those of other religions.'"

"Sir, this conversion magic is excellent. This conversion magic is
lovely! If my loved ones---relatives and kin---were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

"That's so true, Bhaddiya! That's so true, Bhaddiya! If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If the whole
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---were to be converted by this,
for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities, it
would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If these great sal
trees were to be converted by this, for giving up unskillful qualities
and embracing skillful qualities, it would be for their lasting welfare
and happiness---if they were sentient. How much more then a human
being!"

</article>
<article id="an4.194">

#### [AN 4.194]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Sāpūga ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmugiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying in the land of the Koliyans,
where they have a town named Sāpūga. Then several Koliyans from Sāpūga
went up to Ānanda, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Venerable
Ānanda said to them:

"Byagghapajjas, these four factors of trying to be pure have been
rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment. What
four? The factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind, view, and
freedom.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in ethics? It's when a
mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in
the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is
called purity of ethics. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of
ethics, or, if it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every
situation by wisdom.' Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called
the factor of trying to be pure in ethics.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in mind? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ...
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is
called purity of mind. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of mind,
or, if it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by
wisdom.' Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the
factor of trying to be pure in mind.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in view? Take a mendicant
who truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called
purity of view. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of view, or, if
it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by wisdom.'
Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the factor of trying
to be pure in view.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in freedom? That noble
disciple---who has these factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind,
and view---detaches their mind from things that arouse greed, and frees
their mind from things that it should be freed from. Doing so, they
experience perfect freedom. This is called purity of freedom. They
think: 'I will fulfill such purity of freedom, or, if it's already
fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by wisdom.' Their
enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the factor of trying
to be pure in freedom.

These four factors of trying to be pure have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get
past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover
the system, and to realize extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an4.195">

#### [AN 4.195]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vappa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vappasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Vappa of the Sakyans, a
disciple of the Jains, went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, bowed, and
sat down to one side. Mahāmoggallāna said to him:

"Vappa, take a person who, due to the fading away of ignorance and the
arising of knowledge, is restrained in body, speech, and mind. Do you
see any reason why defilements giving rise to painful feelings would
defile that person in the next life?"

"Sir, I do see such a case. Take a person who did bad deeds in a past
life. But the result of that has not yet ripened. For this reason
defilements giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person in
the next life." But this conversation between Mahāmoggallāna and Vappa
was left unfinished.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, and said to
Mahāmoggallāna, "Moggallāna, what were you sitting talking about just
now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

Moggallāna repeated the entire conversation to the Buddha, and
concluded: "This was my conversation with Vappa that was unfinished when
the Buddha arrived."

Then the Buddha said to Vappa, "Vappa, we can discuss this. But only if
you allow what should be allowed, and reject what should be rejected.
And if you ask me the meaning of anything you don't understand, saying:
'Sir, why is this? What's the meaning of that?'"

"Sir, let us discuss this. I will do as you say."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating bodily activity. These
don't occur in someone who avoids such bodily activity. They don't
perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing
their results little by little. This wearing away is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves. Do you see any reason
why defilements giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person
in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating verbal activity. These
don't occur in someone who avoids such verbal activity. They don't
perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing
their results little by little. This wearing away is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves. Do you see any reason
why defilements giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person
in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating mental activity. These
don't occur in someone who avoids such mental activity. They don't
perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing
their results little by little. This wearing away is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves. Do you see any reason
why defilements giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person
in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of ignorance. These don't occur when
ignorance fades away and knowledge arises. They don't perform any new
deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little
by little. This wearing away is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves. Do you see any reason why defilements
giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person in the next
life?"

"No, sir."

"A mendicant whose mind is rightly freed like this has achieved six
consistent responses. Seeing a sight with the eye, they're neither happy
nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with
the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with
the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with
the mind, they're neither happy nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful
and aware. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: 'I
feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right
here.'

Suppose there was a shadow cast by a post. Then along comes a person
with a spade and basket. They cut down the post at its base, dig it up,
and pull it out by its roots, right down to the fibers and stems. Then
they split it apart, cut up the parts, and chop them into splinters.
Next they dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire,
and reduce them to ashes. Then they sweep away the ashes in a strong
wind, or float them away down a swift stream. And so the shadow cast by
the post is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated,
and unable to arise in the future.

In the same way, a mendicant whose mind is rightly freed like this has
achieved six consistent responses. Seeing a sight with the eye, they're
neither happy nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing
a sound with the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a
flavor with the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an
idea with the mind, they're neither happy nor sad, but remain
equanimous, mindful and aware. Feeling the end of the body approaching,
they understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the
end of life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life
approaching.' They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has
come to an end, everything that's felt, being no longer relished, will
become cool right here.'"

When he said this, Vappa the Sakyan, the disciple of the Jains, said to
the Buddha:

"Sir, suppose there was a man who raised commercial horses for profit.
But he never made any profit, and instead just got weary and frustrated.
In the same way, I paid homage to those Jain fools for profit. But I
never made any profit, and instead just got weary and frustrated. From
this day forth, any confidence I had in those Jain fools I sweep away as
in a strong wind, or float away as down a swift stream.

Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an4.196">

#### [AN 4.196]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sāḷha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāḷhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then Sāḷha and Abhaya the Licchavis went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who advocate crossing the
flood by means of two things: purification of ethics, and mortification
in disgust of sin. What does the Buddha say about this?"

"Sāḷha, purification of ethics is one of the factors of the ascetic
life, I say. But those ascetics and brahmins who teach fervent
mortification in disgust of sin---regarding it as essential and sticking
to it---are incapable of crossing the flood. And those ascetics and
brahmins whose livelihood and behavior by way of body, speech, and mind,
is not pure are also incapable of knowing and seeing, of supreme
awakening.

Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood.
There he'd see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free
of defects. He'd cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and
completely strip off the branches and foliage. Then he'd trim it with
axes and machetes, plane it, and sand it with a rock. Finally, he'd
launch out on the river.

What do you think, Sāḷha? Is that man capable of crossing the river?"

"No, sir. Why not? Because that green sal tree is well worked on the
outside, but inside it's still not cleared out. I'd expect that green
sal tree to sink, and the man to come to ruin."

"In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who teach fervent
mortification in disgust of sin---regarding it as essential and sticking
to it---are incapable of crossing the flood. And those ascetics and
brahmins whose livelihood and behavior by way of body, speech, and mind
is not pure are also incapable of knowing and seeing, of supreme
awakening.

But those ascetics and brahmins who don't teach mortification in disgust
of sin---not regarding it as essential or sticking to it---are capable
of crossing the flood. And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by
way of body, speech, and mind is pure are also capable of knowing and
seeing, of supreme awakening.

Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood.
There he'd see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free
of defects. He'd cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and
completely strip off the branches and foliage. Then he'd trim it with
axes and machetes. Then he'd take a chisel and completely clear it out
inside. Then he'd plane it, sand it with a rock, and make it into a
boat. Finally he'd fix it with oars and rudder, and launch out on the
river.

What do you think, Sāḷha? Is that man capable of crossing the river?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because that green sal tree is well worked on
the outside, cleared out on the inside, made into a boat, and fixed with
oars and rudder. I'd expect that boat to not sink, and the man to safely
make it to the far shore."

"In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who don't teach
fervent mortification in disgust of sin---not regarding it as essential
or sticking to it---are capable of crossing the flood. And those
ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and mind is
pure are also capable of knowing and seeing, of supreme awakening.
Suppose there was a warrior who knew lots of fancy archery tricks. It is
only with these three factors that he becomes worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What three? He's a
long-distance shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects.

Just as a warrior is a long-distance shooter, a noble disciple has right
immersion. A noble disciple with right immersion truly sees any kind of
form at all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or
subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'
They truly see any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

Just as a warrior is a marksman, a noble disciple has right view. A
noble disciple with right view truly understands: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.

Just as a warrior shatters large objects, a noble disciple has right
freedom. A noble disciple with right freedom shatters the great mass of
ignorance."

</article>
<article id="an4.197">

#### [AN 4.197]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Queen Mallikā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mallikādevīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Queen Mallikā went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why in this life some
females are ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; and poor, with few
assets and possessions; and insignificant?

And why are some females ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; but rich,
affluent, wealthy, and illustrious?

And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty; but poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant?

And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty; and rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious?"

"Take a female who is irritable and bad-tempered. Even when criticized a
little bit she loses her temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and
hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. She
doesn't give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. And she's jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the
possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to
others. If she comes back to this place after passing away, wherever she
is reborn she's ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; and poor, with few
assets and possessions; and insignificant.

Take another female who is irritable and bad-tempered. ... But she does
give to ascetics or brahmins ... And she's not jealous ... If she comes
back to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn she's
ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; but rich, affluent, wealthy, and
illustrious.

Take another female who isn't irritable and bad-tempered. ... But she
doesn't give to ascetics or brahmins ... And she's jealous ... If she
comes back to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn
she's attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; but poor,
with few assets and possessions; and insignificant.

Take another female who isn't irritable and bad-tempered. ... She gives
to ascetics and brahmins ... And she's not jealous ... If she comes back
to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn she's
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; and rich,
affluent, wealthy, and illustrious.

This is why some females are ugly ... and poor ... and insignificant.
And some females are ugly ... but rich ... and illustrious. And some
females are attractive ... but poor ... and insignificant. And some
females are attractive ... and rich ... and illustrious."

When this was said, Queen Mallikā said to the Buddha:

"Sir, in another life I must have been irritable and bad-tempered. Even
when lightly criticized I must have lost my temper, becoming annoyed,
hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. For now I am ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking.

In another life I must have given to ascetics or brahmins such things as
food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and
bed, house, and lighting. For now I am rich, affluent, and wealthy.

In another life, I must not have been jealous, envying, resenting, and
begrudging the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and
veneration given to others. For now I am illustrious. In this royal
court I command maidens of the aristocrats, brahmins, and householders.
So, sir, from this day forth I will not be irritable and bad-tempered.
Even when heavily criticized I won't lose my temper, become annoyed,
hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. I
will give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing,
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.
I will not be jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the
possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to
others.

Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an4.198">

#### [AN 4.198]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fervent Mortification of Oneself ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Attantapasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of mortifying
    themselves.
2.  One person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying
    others.
3.  One person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of
    mortifying themselves and others.
4.  One person neither mortifies themselves nor others, pursuing the
    practice of not mortifying themselves or others. They live without
    wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss,
    with self become divine.

And how does one person mortify themselves, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves? It's when someone goes naked, ignoring
conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called.
They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on their
behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything from a
pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a
shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a
woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or
where there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or
meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer. They go to just one house for
alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to
seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set
intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
hair and beard, pursuing this practice. They constantly stand, refusing
seats. They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. They lie on a
mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. They're devoted to
ritual bathing three times a day, including the evening. And so they
live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body.
That's how one person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves.

And how does one person mortify others, pursuing the practice of
mortifying others? It's when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a
butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. That's
how one person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying
others.

And how does one person mortify themselves and others, pursuing the
practice of mortifying themselves and others? It's when a person is an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new
ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair
and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with
ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the hall with
his chief queen and the brahmin high priest. There he lies on the bare
ground strewn with grass. The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a
cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk
from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the
third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is served to the sacred flame.
The calf feeds on the remainder. He says: 'Slaughter this many bulls,
bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this
many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!' His
bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of
punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. That's how one
person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves and others.

And how does one person neither mortify themselves nor others, pursuing
the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, living without
wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with
self become divine? It's when a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child,
or someone reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One
and reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings. They give up stealing. They take only what's given,
and expect only what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving. They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. They give up lying. They speak the truth
and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't trick
the world with their words. They give up divisive speech. They don't
repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people
against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided,
supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words
that promote harmony. They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way
that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite,
likable, and agreeable to the people. They give up talking nonsense.
Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching
and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable,
reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the
day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They
refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They refrain
from beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and
makeup. They refrain from high and luxurious beds. They refrain from
receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and girls, male
and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants,
cows, horses, and mares, and fields and land. They refrain from running
errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights, metals, or
measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder,
abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

Seeing a sight with the eyes, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. Hearing a sound with
the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with
the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with
the mind, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving
restraint over it. When they have this noble sense restraint, they
experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, they return
from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving up covetousness for the
world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the
mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate
with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings,
cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they
meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light,
mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving
up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their
mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse.
Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided
about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. They give up
these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.
Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection of past lives ...
knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings ... knowledge of
the ending of defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' That's how one person neither mortifies themselves nor
others, pursuing the practice of not mortifying themselves or others,
living without wishes in the present life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine.

These are the four people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.199">

#### [AN 4.199]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Craving, the Weaver ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you about craving---the weaver, the migrant,
the creeping, the clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it.
It makes the world tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and
matted like rushes and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad
places, the underworld, transmigration. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is that craving ...? There are eighteen currents of craving
that derive from the interior, and eighteen that derive from the
exterior.

What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior?
When there is the concept 'I am', there are the concepts 'I am such', 'I
am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine',
'such is mine', 'thus is mine', 'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such
is also mine', 'thus is also mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will
be', 'I will be such', 'I will be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. These
are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior.

What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the exterior?
When there is the concept 'I am because of this', there are the concepts
'I am such because of this', 'I am thus because of this', 'I am
otherwise because of this'; 'I am fleeting because of this', 'I am
lasting because of this'; 'mine because of this', 'such is mine because
of this', 'thus is mine because of this', 'otherwise is mine because of
this'; 'also mine because of this', 'such is also mine because of this',
'thus is also mine because of this', 'otherwise is also mine because of
this'; 'I will be because of this', 'I will be such because of this', 'I
will be thus because of this', 'I will be otherwise because of this'.
These are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the
exterior.

So there are eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior,
and eighteen that derive from the exterior. These are called the
thirty-six currents of craving. Each of these pertain to the past,
future, and present, making one hundred and eight currents of craving.

This is that craving---the weaver, the migrant, the creeping, the
clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it. It makes the world
tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes
and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad places, the
underworld, transmigration."

</article>
<article id="an4.200">

#### [AN 4.200]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Love and Hate ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pemasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are born of love and hate. What four?

1.  Love is born of love,
2.  hate is born of love,
3.  love is born of hate, and
4.  hate is born of hate.

And how is love born of love? It's when someone likes, loves, and cares
for a person. Others treat that person with liking, love, and care. They
think: 'These others like the person I like.' And so love for them
springs up. That's how love is born of love.

And how is hate born of love? It's when someone likes, loves, and cares
for a person. Others treat that person with disliking, loathing, and
detestation. They think: 'These others dislike the person I like.' And
so hate for them springs up. That's how hate is born of love.

And how is love born of hate? It's when someone dislikes, loathes, and
detests a person. Others treat that person with disliking, loathing, and
detestation. They think: 'These others dislike the person I dislike.'
And so love for them springs up. That's how love is born of hate.

And how is hate born of hate? It's when someone dislikes, loathes, and
detests a person. Others treat that person with liking, love, and care.
They think: 'These others like the person I dislike.' And so hate for
them springs up. That's how hate is born of hate.

These are the four things that are born of love and hate.

A time comes when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the first
absorption. At that time they have no love born of love, hate born of
love, love born of hate, or hate born of hate.

A time comes when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. At that time they
have no love born of love, hate born of love, love born of hate, or hate
born of hate.

A time comes when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. At that time
any love born of love, hate born of love, love born of hate, or hate
born of hate is given up, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. This is called a
mendicant who doesn't draw close or push back or fume or ignite or burn
up.

And how does a mendicant draw close? It's when a mendicant regards form
as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard
feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in self, or self in
feeling. They regard perception as self, self as having perception,
perception in self, or self in perception. They regard choices as self,
self as having choices, choices in self, or self in choices. They regard
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness. That's how a mendicant draws close.

And how does a mendicant not draw close? It's when a mendicant doesn't
regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
They don't regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in
self, or self in feeling. They don't regard perception as self, self as
having perception, perception in self, or self in perception. They don't
regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in self, or self
in choices. They don't regard consciousness as self, self as having
consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's
how a mendicant doesn't draw close.

And how does a mendicant push back? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with a mendicant, and the mendicant abuses, annoys, or argues
back at them. That's how a mendicant pushes back.

And how does a mendicant not push back? It's when someone abuses,
annoys, or argues with a mendicant, and the mendicant doesn't abuse,
annoy, or argue back at them. That's how a mendicant doesn't push back.

And how does a mendicant fume? When there is the concept 'I am', there
are the concepts 'I am such', 'I am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am
fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine', 'such is mine', 'thus is mine',
'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such is also mine', 'thus is also
mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will be', 'I will be such', 'I will
be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. That's how a mendicant fumes.

And how does a mendicant not fume? When there is no concept 'I am',
there are no concepts 'I am such', 'I am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am
fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine', 'such is mine', 'thus is mine',
'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such is also mine', 'thus is also
mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will be', 'I will be such', 'I will
be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. That's how a mendicant doesn't fume.

And how is a mendicant ignited? When there is the concept 'I am because
of this', there are the concepts 'I am such because of this', 'I am thus
because of this', 'I am otherwise because of this'; 'I am fleeting
because of this', 'I am lasting because of this'; 'mine because of
this', 'such is mine because of this', 'thus is mine because of this',
'otherwise is mine because of this'; 'also mine because of this', 'such
is also mine because of this', 'thus is also mine because of this',
'otherwise is also mine because of this'; 'I will be because of this',
'I will be such because of this', 'I will be thus because of this', 'I
will be otherwise because of this'. That's how a mendicant is ignited.

And how is a mendicant not ignited? When there is no concept 'I am
because of this', there are no concepts 'I am such because of this', 'I
am thus because of this', 'I am otherwise because of this'; 'I am
fleeting because of this', 'I am lasting because of this'; 'mine because
of this', 'such is mine because of this', 'thus is mine because of
this', 'otherwise is mine because of this'; 'also mine because of this',
'such is also mine because of this', 'thus is also mine because of
this', 'otherwise is also mine because of this'; 'I will be because of
this', 'I will be such because of this', 'I will be thus because of
this', 'I will be otherwise because of this'. That's how a mendicant is
not ignited.

And how does a mendicant burn up? It's when a mendicant hasn't given up
the conceit 'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is burned up.

And how does a mendicant not burn up? It's when a mendicant has given up
the conceit 'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is not burned up."

</article>

[]{#an4-pancamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fifth Fifty {#an4-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an4-pancamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on a Good Person {#an4-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an4-sappurisavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.201">

#### [AN 4.201]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training Rules ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhāpadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is an untrue person? It's someone who kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies, and uses alcoholic drinks that
cause negligence. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who kills living
creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies, and uses alcoholic
drinks that cause negligence. And they encourage others to do these
things. This is called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks
that cause negligence. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks
that cause negligence. And they encourage others to avoid these things.
This is called an even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.202">

#### [AN 4.202]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faithless ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assaddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person.

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who is faithless, shameless,
imprudent, with little learning, lazy, unmindful, and witless. This is
called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who is faithless,
shameless, imprudent, with little learning, lazy, confused, and witless.
And they encourage others in these same qualities. This is called an
even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who is faithful, conscientious,
prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. This is called a true
person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who is personally
accomplished in faith, conscience, prudence, learning, energy,
mindfulness, and wisdom. And they encourage others in these same
qualities. This is called an even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.203">

#### [AN 4.203]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Seven Kinds of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattakammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and a truer person.

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who kills living
creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they encourage others to do
these things. This is called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they encourage others to avoid
these things. This is called an even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.204">

#### [AN 4.204]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ten Kinds of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dasakammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person.

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who kills living creatures,
steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with
wrong view. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who kills living
creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous, malicious,
with wrong view. And they encourage others to do these things. This is
called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented,
kind-hearted, with right view. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're contented,
kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to do these
things. This is called an even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.205">

#### [AN 4.205]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eightfold ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṭṭhaṅgikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person.

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. And they encourage
others in these same qualities. This is called an even more untrue
person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. And they encourage others in
these same qualities. This is called an even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.206">

#### [AN 4.206]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Path with Ten Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dasamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person.

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. And they encourage others in these same qualities. This is
called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
And they encourage others in these same qualities. This is called an
even truer person."

</article>
<article id="an4.207">

#### [AN 4.207]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Character (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapāpadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you who's bad and who's worse, who's good and
who's better.

And who's bad? It's someone who kills living creatures, steals, and
commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view.
This is called bad.

And who's worse? It's someone who kills living creatures, steals, and
commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. And
they encourage others to do these things. This is called worse.

And who's good? It's someone who doesn't kill living creatures, steal,
or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted,
with right view. This is called good.

And who's better? It's someone who doesn't kill living creatures, steal,
or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're contented, kind-hearted, with
right view. And they encourage others to do these things. This is called
better."

</article>
<article id="an4.208">

#### [AN 4.208]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Character (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapāpadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you who's bad and who's worse, who's good and
who's better.

And who's bad? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called bad.

And who's worse? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. And they encourage
others in these same qualities. This is called worse.

And who's good? It's someone who has right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called
good.

And who's better? It's someone who has right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. And they encourage
others in these same qualities. This is called better."

</article>
<article id="an4.209">

#### [AN 4.209]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Character (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyapāpadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you bad character and worse character, good
character and better character.

And who has bad character? It's someone who kills living creatures,
steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with
wrong view. This is called bad character.

And who has worse character? It's someone who kills living creatures,
steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous, malicious, with wrong
view. And they encourage others to do these things. This is called worse
character.

And who has good character? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented,
kind-hearted, with right view. This is called good character.

And who has better character? It's someone who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're contented,
kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to do these
things. This is called better character."

</article>
<article id="an4.210">

#### [AN 4.210]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Character (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthapāpadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you bad character and worse character, good
character and better character.

And who has bad character? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called bad character.

And who has worse character? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
And they encourage others in these same qualities. This is called worse
character.

And who has good character? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is called good character.

And who has better character? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
And they encourage others in these same qualities. This is called better
character."

</article>

[]{#an4-parisavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Assemblies {#an4-parisavagga.xhtml_an4-parisavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.211">

#### [AN 4.211]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assembly ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four corrupt an assembly. What four? A monk, nun,
layman, or laywoman who is unethical, of bad character. These are the
four that corrupt an assembly.

Mendicants, these four beautify an assembly. What four? A monk, nun,
layman, or laywoman who is ethical, of good character. These are the
four that beautify an assembly."

</article>
<article id="an4.212">

#### [AN 4.212]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Diṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and wrong view.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and right view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.213">

#### [AN 4.213]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ungrateful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akataññutāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being ungrateful
and thankless. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being grateful and
thankful. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.214">

#### [AN 4.214]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Killing Living Creatures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāṇātipātīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. ... Someone with
four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They don't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.215">

#### [AN 4.215]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Path (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action. ... Someone with four qualities is
raised up to heaven. ... right view, right thought, right speech, right
action. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.216">

#### [AN 4.216]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Path (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... wrong livelihood,
wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. Someone with four
qualities is raised up to heaven. ... right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.217">

#### [AN 4.217]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Expression (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavohārapathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they haven't. ... Someone
with four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They say they haven't
seen, heard, thought, or known something, and they haven't. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.218">

#### [AN 4.218]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Expression (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavohārapathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They say they
haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they have. ...
Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, and they have. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.219">

#### [AN 4.219]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lack of Conscience ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ahirikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They're
faithless, unethical, shameless, and imprudent. ... Someone with four
qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They're faithful, ethical,
conscientious, and prudent. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.220">

#### [AN 4.220]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unethical ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dussīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They're faithless, unethical, lazy, and witless. Someone with
these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They're
faithful, ethical, energetic, and wise. Someone with these four
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an4-duccaritavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Bad Conduct {#an4-duccaritavagga.xhtml_an4-duccaritavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.221">

#### [AN 4.221]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Verbal Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.
What four? Speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. These
are the four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.

There are these four kinds of good conduct by way of speech. What four?
Speech that's true, harmonious, gentle, and thoughtful. These are the
four kinds of good conduct by way of speech."

</article>
<article id="an4.222">

#### [AN 4.222]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Diṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four? Bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and wrong view. When a
foolish, incompetent untrue person has these four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What four?
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and right view. When an
astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an4.223">

#### [AN 4.223]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ungrateful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akataññutāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four? Bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being ungrateful and
thankless. An astute person ... creates much merit. ... Good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, and being grateful and thankful. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.224">

#### [AN 4.224]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Killing Living Creatures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāṇātipātīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... They don't kill living creatures,
steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.225">

#### [AN 4.225]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Path (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action. ... An astute person ... creates
much merit. ... right view, right thought, right speech, right action.
..."

</article>
<article id="an4.226">

#### [AN 4.226]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Path (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... wrong livelihood,
wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.227">

#### [AN 4.227]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Expression (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavohārapathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they haven't. ... An
astute person ... creates much merit. ... They say they haven't seen,
heard, thought, or known something, and they haven't. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.228">

#### [AN 4.228]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Expression (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavohārapathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They say they haven't
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they have. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... They say they've seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and they have. ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.229">

#### [AN 4.229]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lack of Conscience ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ahirikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They're faithless,
unethical, shameless, and imprudent. ... An astute person ... creates
much merit. ... They're faithful, ethical, conscientious, and prudent.
..."

</article>
<article id="an4.230">

#### [AN 4.230]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Witless ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duppaññasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They're faithless,
unethical, lazy, and witless. ... An astute person ... creates much
merit. ... They're faithful, ethical, energetic, and wise. When an
astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>
<article id="an4.231">

#### [AN 4.231]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Poets ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kavisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four poets. What four?

A poet who thoughtfully composes their own work, a poet who repeats the
oral transmission, a poet who educates, and a poet who improvises.

These are the four poets."

</article>

[]{#an4-kammavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Deeds {#an4-kammavagga.xhtml_an4-kammavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.232">

#### [AN 4.232]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deeds In Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results.
2.  There are bright deeds with bright results.
3.  There are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results.
4.  There are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
    results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.233">

#### [AN 4.233]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deeds in Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they're reborn in a hurtful world, where hurtful contacts
strike them. Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful
feelings that are exclusively painful---like the beings in hell. These
are called dark deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they're reborn in a pleasing world, where pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing
feelings that are exclusively happy---like the gods of universal beauty.
These are called bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world
that is both hurtful and pleasing, where hurtful and pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they
experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of
pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright
results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.234">

#### [AN 4.234]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Soṇakāyana ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soṇakāyanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Sikhāmoggallāna the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Sikhāmoggallāna sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, a few days ago the student Soṇakāyana came to me and
said: 'The ascetic Gotama advocates not doing any deeds. So he teaches
the annihilation of the world!' The world exists through deeds, and it
remains because deeds are undertaken."

"Brahmin, I can't recall even seeing the student Soṇakāyana, so how
could we possibly have had such a discussion? I declare these four kinds
of deeds, having realized them with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are the dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. ... Touched by hurtful
contacts, they experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively
painful---like the beings in hell. These are called dark deeds with dark
results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. ... Touched by
pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing feelings that are
exclusively happy---like the gods of universal beauty. These are called
bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. ... Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts,
they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of
pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright
results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.235">

#### [AN 4.235]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training Rules (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasikkhāpadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are the dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone kills
living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies, and uses
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are called dark deeds with
dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are called bright deeds
with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.236">

#### [AN 4.236]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Training Rules (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasikkhāpadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It\'s when someone murders
their mother or father or a perfected one. They maliciously shed the
blood of a Realized One. Or they cause a schism in the Saṅgha. These are
called dark deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't
use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
content, kind-hearted, with right view. These are called bright deeds
with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.237">

#### [AN 4.237]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Path ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;
2.  bright deeds with bright results;
3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and
4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark
deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called
bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These are called neither dark nor
bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the
ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.238">

#### [AN 4.238]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Awakening Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bojjhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight....

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark
deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called
bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These are called neither dark nor bright
deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of
deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

</article>
<article id="an4.239">

#### [AN 4.239]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāvajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and
blameworthy view. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Blameless
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameless view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.240">

#### [AN 4.240]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Pleasing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abyābajjhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Hurtful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and hurtful view.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Pleasing
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and pleasing view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.241">

#### [AN 4.241]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ascetics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"'Only here is there a first ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a
third ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects are empty of
ascetics.' This, mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion's
roar.

And who is the first ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
three fetters---is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening. This is the first ascetic.

And who is the second ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---is a
once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end
of suffering. This is the second ascetic.

And who is the third ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
the five lower fetters---is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. This is the third
ascetic.

And who is the fourth ascetic? It's a mendicant who realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is the fourth ascetic.

'Only here is there a first ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third
ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects are empty of ascetics.'
This, mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion's roar."

</article>
<article id="an4.242">

#### [AN 4.242]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Benefits of Relying on a True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisānisaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you can expect four benefits from relying on a true person.
What four? Growth in noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. You
can expect these four benefits from relying on a true person."

</article>

[]{#an4-apattibhayavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Perils of Offenses {#an4-apattibhayavagga.xhtml_an4-apattibhayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.243">

#### [AN 4.243]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Schism in the Saṅgha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁghabhedakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "Well, Ānanda, has that disciplinary issue
been settled yet?"

"How could it be, sir? Venerable Anuruddha's pupil Bāhiya remains
entirely committed to creating a schism in the Saṅgha. But Anuruddha
doesn't think to say a single word about it."

"But Ānanda, since when has Anuruddha been involved in disciplinary
issues in the midst of the Saṅgha? Shouldn't you, together with
Sāriputta and Moggallāna, settle all disciplinary issues that come up?

A bad monk sees four reasons to relish schism in the Saṅgha. What four?
Take an unethical monk, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious
behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner---though
claiming to be one---rotten inside, festering, and depraved. He thinks:
'Suppose the monks know that I'm a bad monk ... If they're in harmony,
they'll expel me, but if they're divided they won't.' A bad monk sees
this as the first reason to relish schism in the Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist
view. He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I have wrong view ... If
they're in harmony they'll expel me, but if they're divided they won't.'
A bad monk sees this as the second reason to relish schism in the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk has wrong livelihood and earns a living by wrong
livelihood. He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I have wrong
livelihood ... If they're in harmony they'll expel me, but if they're
divided they won't.' A bad monk sees this as the third reason to relish
schism in the Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk desires material things, honor, and admiration.
He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I desire material things, honor,
and admiration. If they're in harmony they won't honor, respect, revere,
or venerate me, but if they're divided they will.' A bad monk sees this
as the fourth reason to relish schism in the Saṅgha.

A bad monk sees these four reasons to relish schism in the Saṅgha."

</article>
<article id="an4.244">

#### [AN 4.244]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perils of Offenses ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āpattibhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four perils of offenses. What four?

Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the
king, saying: 'Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a criminal. May Your
Majesty punish them!' The king would say: 'Go, my men, and tie this
man's arms tightly behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head
and march him from street to street and square to square to the beating
of a harsh drum. Then take him out the south gate and there, to the
south of the city, chop off his head.' The king's men would do as they
were told. Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have done a
truly bad and reprehensible deed, a capital offense. There's no way I'd
ever do such a bad and reprehensible deed, a capital offense.' In the
same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception
of peril regarding expulsion offenses. It can be expected that if they
haven't committed an expulsion offense they won't, and if they committed
one they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth, mess up his hair, and put a
club on his shoulder. Then he approaches a large crowd and says: 'Sirs,
I've done a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of clubbing. I submit
to your pleasure.' Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have
done a truly bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of clubbing. ...
There's no way I'd ever do such a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving
of clubbing.' In the same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such
an acute perception of peril regarding suspension offenses. It can be
expected that if they haven't committed a suspension offense they won't,
and if they committed one they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth, mess up his hair, and put a
sack of ashes on his shoulder. Then he approaches a large crowd and
says: 'Sirs, I've done a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of a sack
of ashes. I submit to your pleasure.' Then a bystander might think:
'This man must have done a truly bad and reprehensible deed, deserving
of a sack of ashes. ... There's no way I'd ever do such a bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of a sack of ashes.' In the same way, take
any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception of peril
regarding confessable offenses. It can be expected that if they haven't
committed a confessable offense they won't, and if they committed one
they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth and mess up his hair. Then he
approaches a large crowd and says: 'Sirs, I've done a bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism. I submit to your pleasure.'
Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have done a truly bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism. ... There's no way I'd ever
do such a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism.' In the
same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception
of peril regarding acknowledgable offenses. It can be expected that if
they haven't committed an acknowledgeable offense they won't, and if
they committed one they will deal with it properly.

These are the four perils of offenses."

</article>
<article id="an4.245">

#### [AN 4.245]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Training ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhānisaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is lived with training as its benefit,
with wisdom as its overseer, with freedom as its core, and with
mindfulness as its ruler.

And how is training its benefit? Firstly, I laid down for my disciples
the training that deals with supplementary regulations in order to
inspire confidence in those without it and to increase confidence in
those who have it. They undertake whatever supplementary regulations I
have laid down, keeping them intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred.

Furthermore, I laid down for my disciples the training that deals with
the fundamentals of the spiritual life in order to rightly end suffering
in every way. They undertake whatever training that deals with the
fundamentals of the spiritual life I have laid down, keeping it intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred. That's how training is its benefit.

And how is wisdom its overseer? I taught the Dhamma to my disciples in
order to rightly end suffering in every way. They examine with wisdom
any teachings I taught them. That's how wisdom is its overseer.

And how is freedom its core? I taught the Dhamma to my disciples in
order to rightly end suffering in every way. They experience through
freedom any teachings I taught them. That's how freedom is its core.

And how is mindfulness its ruler? Mindfulness is well established in
oneself: 'In this way I'll fulfill the training dealing with
supplementary regulations, or support with wisdom in every situation the
training dealing with supplementary regulations I've already fulfilled.'
Mindfulness is well established in oneself: 'In this way I'll fulfill
the training dealing with the fundamentals of the spiritual life, or
support with wisdom in every situation the training dealing with the
fundamentals of the spiritual life I've already fulfilled.' Mindfulness
is well established in oneself: 'In this way I'll examine with wisdom
the teaching that I haven't yet examined, or support with wisdom in
every situation the teaching I've already examined.' Mindfulness is well
established in oneself: 'In this way I'll experience through freedom the
teaching that I haven't yet experienced, or support with wisdom in every
situation the teaching I've already experienced.' That's how mindfulness
is its ruler.

'This spiritual life is lived with training as its benefit, with wisdom
as its overseer, with freedom as its core, and with mindfulness as its
ruler.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an4.246">

#### [AN 4.246]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lying Postures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Seyyāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of lying down. What four? The
ways a corpse, a pleasure seeker, a lion, and a Realized One lie down.

And how does a corpse lie down? Corpses usually lie flat on their backs.
This is called the way a corpse lies down.

And how does a pleasure seeker lie down? Pleasure seekers usually lie
down on their left side. This is called the way a pleasure seeker lies
down.

And how does a lion lie down? The lion, king of beasts, lies down on the
right side, placing one foot on top of the other, with his tail tucked
between his thighs. When he wakes, he lifts his front quarters and
checks his hind quarters. If he sees that any part of his body is
disordered or displaced, he is displeased. But if he sees that no part
of his body is disordered or displaced, he is pleased. This is called
the way a lion lies down.

And how does a Realized One lie down? It's when a Realized One, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called the way a
Realized One lies down.

These are the four ways of lying down."

</article>
<article id="an4.247">

#### [AN 4.247]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of a Monument ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Thūpārahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four are worthy of a monument. What four? A Realized
One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; an Independent Buddha; a
disciple of a Realized One; and a wheel-turning monarch. These four are
worthy of a monument."

</article>
<article id="an4.248">

#### [AN 4.248]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Growth of Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññāvuddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things lead to the growth of wisdom. What four?
Associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational
application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching. These
four things lead to the growth of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an4.249">

#### [AN 4.249]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Very Helpful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahukārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these four things are very helpful to a human being. What
four? Associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching,
rational application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching.
These four things are very helpful to a human being."

</article>
<article id="an4.250">

#### [AN 4.250]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Expressions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble expressions. What four? Saying
you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, but you haven't. These
are the four ignoble expressions."

</article>
<article id="an4.251">

#### [AN 4.251]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Expressions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four noble expressions. What four? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you haven't.
These are the four noble expressions."

</article>
<article id="an4.252">

#### [AN 4.252]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Expressions (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble expressions. What four? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you have.
These are the four ignoble expressions."

</article>
<article id="an4.253">

#### [AN 4.253]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Expressions (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four noble expressions. What four? Saying
you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you have. These are
the four noble expressions."

</article>

[]{#an4-abhinnavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Direct Knowledges {#an4-abhinnavagga.xhtml_an4-abhinnavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.254">

#### [AN 4.254]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Insight ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhiññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four things. What four? There are things
that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. There are
things that should be given up by direct knowledge. There are things
that should be developed by direct knowledge. There are things that
should be realized by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge? The five grasping aggregates. These are called the things
that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for continued existence. These are called the
things that should be given up by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge?
Serenity and discernment. These are called the things that should be
developed by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge?
Knowledge and freedom. These are called the things that should be
realized by direct knowledge.

These are the four things."

</article>
<article id="an4.255">

#### [AN 4.255]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Searches ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pariyesanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble searches. What four? Someone
liable to old age searches only for what grows old. Someone liable to
sickness searches only for what gets sick. Someone liable to death
searches only for what dies. Someone liable to become corrupted searches
only for what is defiled. These are the four ignoble searches.

There are these four noble searches. What four? Someone who is liable to
grow old, knowing the drawback in what grows old, searches for that
which is free of old age, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment. Someone who is liable to get sick, knowing the drawback
in what gets sick, searches for that which is free of sickness, the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment. Someone who is liable
to die, knowing the drawback in what dies, searches for that which is
free of death, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment.
Someone liable to become corrupted, knowing the drawback in what is
defiled, searches for the undefiled supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment. These are the four noble searches."

</article>
<article id="an4.256">

#### [AN 4.256]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ways of Being Inclusive ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgahavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of being inclusive. What four?
Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. These are the four ways
of being inclusive."

</article>
<article id="an4.257">

#### [AN 4.257]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Māluṅkyaputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mālukyaputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Māluṅkyaputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well now, Māluṅkyaputta, what are we to say to the young monks, when
even an old man like you, elderly and senior, asks the Realized One for
brief advice?"

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy One
teach me the Dhamma in brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of
what the Buddha says! Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's
teaching!"

"Māluṅkyaputta, there are four things that give rise to craving in a
mendicant. What four? For the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or
rebirth in this or that state. These are the four things that give rise
to craving in a mendicant. That craving is given up by a mendicant, cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future. Then they're called a mendicant who has cut off
craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has
made an end of suffering."

When Māluṅkyaputta had been given this advice by the Buddha, he got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving. Then Māluṅkyaputta, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Māluṅkyaputta became one of the
perfected.

</article>
<article id="an4.258">

#### [AN 4.258]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Families ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when families don't stay wealthy for long, it's always for
one or more of these four reasons. What four? They don't look for what's
lost; they don't fix old things; they eat and drink too much; or they
put an unethical woman or man in charge. When families don't stay
wealthy for long, it's always for one or more of these four reasons.

When families do stay wealthy for long, it's always for one or more of
these four reasons. What four? They look for what's lost; they fix old
things; they eat and drink in moderation; and they put an ethical woman
or man in charge. When families do stay wealthy for long, it's always
for one or more of these four reasons."

</article>
<article id="an4.259">

#### [AN 4.259]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Thoroughbred (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
four? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, fast,
and well-proportioned. A fine royal thoroughbred with these four factors
is worthy of a king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, fast, and well proportioned.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when they truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is fast.

And how is a mendicant well proportioned? It's when a mendicant receives
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.
That's how a mendicant is well proportioned.

A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.260">

#### [AN 4.260]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Thoroughbred (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
four? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, fast,
and well-proportioned. A fine royal thoroughbred with these four factors
is worthy of a king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, fast, and well proportioned.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep
the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant is fast.

And how is a mendicant well proportioned? It's when a mendicant receives
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.
That's how a mendicant is well proportioned.

A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

</article>
<article id="an4.261">

#### [AN 4.261]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the four powers."

</article>
<article id="an4.262">

#### [AN 4.262]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wilderness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Araññasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four qualities they're not ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What four?
They have sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; or they're witless,
dull, and stupid. When a mendicant has these four qualities they're not
ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.

When a mendicant has four qualities they're ready to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What four? They have thoughts
of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and they're wise, bright,
and clever. When a mendicant has these four qualities they're ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

</article>
<article id="an4.263">

#### [AN 4.263]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four?
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameworthy
view. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these four qualities
they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What four?
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameless view.
When an astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves healthy and whole. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

</article>

[]{#an4-kammapathavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds {#an4-kammapathavagga.xhtml_an4-kammapathavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.264">

#### [AN 4.264]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Killing Living Creatures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāṇātipātīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They themselves kill living creatures; they encourage others to
kill living creatures; they approve of killing living creatures; and
they praise killing living creatures. Someone with these four qualities
is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't themselves kill living creatures; they encourage others to not
kill living creatures; they approve of not killing living creatures; and
they praise not killing living creatures. Someone with these four
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an4.265">

#### [AN 4.265]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stealing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adinnādāyīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They themselves steal ... Someone with four qualities is raised up
to heaven. ...

They don't themselves steal ... "

</article>
<article id="an4.266">

#### [AN 4.266]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Misconduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchācārīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves commit sexual misconduct ...

They themselves don't commit sexual misconduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.267">

#### [AN 4.267]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Musāvādīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves lie ...

... They themselves don't lie ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.268">

#### [AN 4.268]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Divisive Speech ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pisuṇavācāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves speak divisively ...

... They themselves don't speak divisively ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.269">

#### [AN 4.269]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Harsh Speech ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pharusavācāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves speak harshly ...

... They themselves don't speak harshly ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.270">

#### [AN 4.270]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Talking Nonsense ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samphappalāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves talk nonsense ...

... They themselves don't talk nonsense ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.271">

#### [AN 4.271]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Covetousness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhijjhālusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves are covetous ...

... They themselves are content ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.272">

#### [AN 4.272]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ill Will ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byāpannacittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves have ill will ...

... They themselves have good will ..."

</article>
<article id="an4.273">

#### [AN 4.273]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wrong View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchādiṭṭhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"... They themselves have wrong view ...

They themselves have right view; they encourage others to have right
view; they approve of right view; and they praise right view. Someone
with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an4-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed {#an4-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an4-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an4.274">

#### [AN 4.274]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Satipaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an4.275">

#### [AN 4.275]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Right Efforts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammappadhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise. ...so that unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up ...
so that skillful qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that
have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are
fulfilled by development. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an4.276">

#### [AN 4.276]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bases of Psychic Power ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Iddhipādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. For insight into greed, these four
things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an4.277-303">

#### [AN 4.277--303]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pariññādisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, four things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an4.304-783">

#### [AN 4.304--783]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Insight into Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dosaabhiññādisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... four things should be developed."

The Book of the Fours is finished.

</article>

[]{#an5.xhtml}

# The Book of the Fives {#an5.xhtml_an5 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an5-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an5-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an5-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Powers of a Trainee {#an5-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an5-sekhabalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.1">

#### [AN 5.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="an5.2">

#### [AN 5.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of conscience? It's when a noble disciple has a
conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful
qualities. This is called the power of conscience.

And what is the power of prudence? It's when a noble disciple is
prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad,
unskillful qualities. This is called the power of prudence.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom. These are the five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

</article>
<article id="an5.3">

#### [AN 5.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they live unhappily in
the present life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless.
When a mendicant has these five qualities they live unhappily in the
present life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has five qualities they live happily in the present
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. When
a mendicant has these five qualities they live happily in the present
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth."

</article>
<article id="an5.4">

#### [AN 5.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cast Down ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yathābhatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy,
and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and
wise. A mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.5">

#### [AN 5.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disrobing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who rejects the training and returns to a
lesser life deserves rebuttal and criticism on five legitimate grounds
in the present life. What five? 'You had no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, or wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or nun who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life deserves rebuttal and
criticism on these five legitimate grounds in the present life.

Any monk or nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and
sadness, weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on five legitimate
grounds in the present life. What five? 'You had faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or
nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness,
weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on these five legitimate
grounds in the present life."

</article>
<article id="an5.6">

#### [AN 5.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Becoming ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samāpattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you don't become unskillful as long as faith is established
in skillful qualities. But when faith vanishes and faithlessness takes
over, you become unskillful.

You don't become unskillful as long as conscience ... prudence ...
energy ... wisdom is established in skillful qualities.

But when wisdom vanishes and witlessness takes over, you become
unskillful."

</article>
<article id="an5.7">

#### [AN 5.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sensual Pleasures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, sentient beings are mostly charmed by sensual pleasures.
When a gentleman has abandoned the scythe and flail and gone forth from
the lay life to homelessness, they're qualified to be called 'a faithful
renunciate from a good family'. Why is that? Because a youth can get
sensual pleasures of this kind or that. Now, all sensual pleasures are
just reckoned as 'sensual pleasures', regardless of whether they're
inferior, average, or superior.

Suppose there was a little baby boy who, because of his nursemaid's
negligence, puts a stick or stone in his mouth. The nursemaid would very
quickly notice and try to take it out. If that didn't work, she'd cradle
his head with her left hand, and take it out using a hooked finger of
her right hand, even if it drew blood. Why is that? I admit she'd know,
'This will distress the child, there's no denying.' Still, it should be
done by a nursemaid who wants what's best for him, out of kindness and
sympathy. And when the boy has grown up and has enough sense, his
nursemaid would not worry about him, thinking: 'The boy can look after
himself. He won't be negligent.'

In the same way, I still need to look after a mendicant who hasn't
finished developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom
regarding skillful qualities. But when a mendicant has finished
developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding
skillful qualities, I need not be concerned, thinking: 'They can look
after themselves. They won't be negligent.'"

</article>
<article id="an5.8">

#### [AN 5.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Failure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cavanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is
faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and
doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with
these five qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true
teaching.

A mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves
in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and
establishes themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with these five
qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.9">

#### [AN 5.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disrespect (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaagāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching.
What five? A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant who is faithless ...
shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. A disrespectful and
irreverent mendicant with these five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail,
and establishes themselves in the true teaching. What five? A respectful
and reverent mendicant who is faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ...
energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching. A respectful and reverent mendicant with these five qualities
doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.10">

#### [AN 5.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disrespect (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaagāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training. What five? A disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant who is faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ...
witless can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching
and training. A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with these five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities can achieve
growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What
five? A respectful and reverent mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. A respectful
and reverent mendicant with these five qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training."

</article>

[]{#an5-balavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Powers {#an5-balavagga.xhtml_an5-balavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.11">

#### [AN 5.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Not Learned From Anyone Else ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ananussutasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I claim to have attained perfection and consummation of insight
regarding principles not learned before from another. The Realized One
has five powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull's
place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine
wheel. What five? The powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. These are the five powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel."

</article>
<article id="an5.12">

#### [AN 5.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Peak ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kūṭasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee. Of these five powers of a trainee, the power
of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything together.

It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is the chief point, which holds and
binds everything together. In the same way, of these five powers of a
trainee, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything
together.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

</article>
<article id="an5.13">

#### [AN 5.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers."

</article>
<article id="an5.14">

#### [AN 5.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the power of
mindfulness.

And what is the power of immersion? It's when a noble disciple, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. This is called the power of immersion.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom.

These are the five powers."

</article>
<article id="an5.15">

#### [AN 5.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Seen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Daṭṭhabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the power of faith be seen? In the four factors of
stream-entry.

And where should the power of energy be seen? In the four right efforts.

And where should the power of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And where should the power of immersion be seen? In the four
absorptions.

And where should the power of wisdom be seen? In the four noble truths.

These are the five powers."

</article>
<article id="an5.16">

#### [AN 5.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Peak, Again ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Punakūṭasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers. Of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together. It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is
the chief point, which holds and binds everything together. In the same
way, of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together."

</article>
<article id="an5.17">

#### [AN 5.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One's Own Welfare ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for their own
welfare, but not that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant is
personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the
knowledge and vision of freedom. But they don't encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for
their own welfare, but not that of others."

</article>
<article id="an5.18">

#### [AN 5.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Welfare of Others (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. But they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own."

</article>
<article id="an5.19">

#### [AN 5.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Welfare of Neither ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing neither for
their own welfare, nor that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. Nor do they encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing
neither for their own welfare, nor that of others."

</article>
<article id="an5.20">

#### [AN 5.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Welfare of Both ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for both
their own welfare and that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and
the knowledge and vision of freedom. And they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing both for
their own welfare and that of others."

</article>

[]{#an5-pancangikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Five Factors {#an5-pancangikavagga.xhtml_an5-pancangikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.21">

#### [AN 5.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disrespect (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaagāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without
fulfilling ethics, it's impossible to fulfill right view. Without
fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right immersion.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's
possible to fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's
possible to fulfill right immersion."

</article>
<article id="an5.22">

#### [AN 5.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disrespect (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaagāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill the entire
spectrum of ethics. Without fulfilling the entire spectrum of ethics,
it's impossible to fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion. Without
fulfilling the entire spectrum of immersion, it's impossible to fulfill
the entire spectrum of wisdom.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of ethics. Having
fulfilled the entire spectrum of ethics, it's possible to fulfill the
entire spectrum of immersion. Having fulfilled the entire spectrum of
immersion, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an5.23">

#### [AN 5.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Corruptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upakkilesasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of native gold. When gold
is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is
brittle and not completely ready for working. What five? Iron, copper,
tin, lead, and silver. When native gold is corrupted by these five
corruptions it's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and
not completely ready for working.

But when native gold is free of these five corruptions it becomes
pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked.
Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they
want, whether a ring, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the
mind is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or radiant. It's
brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of
defilements. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five
corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it's not
pliable, workable, or radiant. It's brittle, and not rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements.

But when the mind is free of these five corruptions it's pliable,
workable, and radiant. It's not brittle, and is rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements. You become capable of realizing
anything that can be realized by insight to which you extend the mind,
since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power---multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful, controlling the body as far as the Brahmā realm.' You're
capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi as "mind
immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in samādhi as "mind not
immersed in samādhi"; freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as
"unfreed mind".' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every
one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' You're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away
and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good
place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings are
reborn according to their deeds.' You're capable of realizing it, since
each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an5.24">

#### [AN 5.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unethical ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dussīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. When there is right
immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital
condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge
and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has
fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled
disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an5.25">

#### [AN 5.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Supported ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuggahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when right view is supported by five factors it has freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and benefit.

What five? It's when right view is supported by ethics, learning,
discussion, serenity, and discernment. When right view is supported by
these five factors it has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as its
fruit and benefit."

</article>
<article id="an5.26">

#### [AN 5.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Opportunities for Freedom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vimuttāyatanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five opportunities for freedom. If a
mendicant stays diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind
is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. What five?

Firstly, the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches Dhamma
to a mendicant. In whatever way the Teacher or a respected spiritual
companion teaches Dhamma to that mendicant, they always feel inspired by
the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy
springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels
bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is
the first opportunity for freedom. If a mendicant stays diligent, keen,
and resolute at this time, their mind is freed, their defilements are
ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. In
whatever way that mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the second
opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma. But the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. In whatever way that mendicant recites the
teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it, they always feel
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the third opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching. But the
mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart,
examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. In whatever
way that mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their
heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it, they
always feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma.
Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When
the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the fourth opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching ... or
think about it. But a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. In whatever way a mendicant's meditation subject as a basis of
immersion is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and
comprehended with wisdom, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the fifth
opportunity for freedom. ...

These are the five opportunities for freedom. If a mendicant stays
diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind is freed, their
defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke."

</article>
<article id="an5.27">

#### [AN 5.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you
develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful, five knowledges arise
for you personally. What five?

'This immersion is blissful now, and results in bliss in the future.'
...

'This immersion is noble and not of the flesh.' ...

'This immersion is not cultivated by sinners.' ...

'This immersion is peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not
held in place by forceful suppression.' ...

'I mindfully enter into and emerge from this immersion.' ...

Develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you develop
limitless immersion, alert and mindful, these five knowledges arise for
you personally."

</article>
<article id="an5.28">

#### [AN 5.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Five Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcaṅgikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you how to develop noble right immersion with
five factors. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how do you develop noble right immersion with five factors?

Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
It has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind
and keeping it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. It's
like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. In
the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. This is
the first way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of
cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads
throughout the lake. There's no part of the lake that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of immersion.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss
born of immersion. This is the second way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. It's
like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of
them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture. There's no
part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. This is
the third way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. It's like someone
sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There's no part of
the body that's not spread over with white cloth. In the same way, they
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. This is the fourth
way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is properly
grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom by a
mendicant. It's like when someone views someone else. Someone standing
might view someone sitting, or someone sitting might view someone lying
down. In the same way, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom by a mendicant. This is the fifth way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

When the noble right immersion with five factors is cultivated in this
way, a mendicant extends the mind to realize by insight each and every
thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing
those things, since each and every one is within range.

Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. If a strong man was to tip it any which way, would
water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to realize by
insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they
are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is
within range.

Suppose there was a square, walled lotus pond on level ground, full to
the brim so a crow could drink from it. If a strong man was to open the
wall on any side, would water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to realize by
insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they
are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is
within range.

Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad ready. A deft horse trainer, a master
charioteer, might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand
and goad in the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes,
whenever he wishes. In the same way, when noble right immersion with
five factors is cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to
realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight;
and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one
is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as far as the
Brahmā realm.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one
is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi as "mind
immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in samādhi as "mind not
immersed in samādhi"; freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as
"unfreed mind".' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every
one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives, with features
and details.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one
is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn according to their
deeds.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is
within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an5.29">

#### [AN 5.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Walking Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Caṅkamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five benefits of walking meditation. What five?
You get fit for traveling, fit for striving in meditation, and healthy.
What's eaten, drunk, chewed, and tasted is properly digested. And
immersion gained while walking lasts long. These are the five benefits
of walking meditation."

</article>
<article id="an5.30">

#### [AN 5.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nāgita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāgitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Icchānaṅgala. He
stayed in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of
Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then, when the night had passed, they took many fresh and cooked foods
and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood outside the
gates making a dreadful racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's attendant. Then the
Buddha said to Nāgita, "Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd
think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala. They've
brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing outside the
gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the mendicant
Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

What you eat, drink, chew, and taste ends up as excrement and urine.
This is its outcome.

When loved ones decay and perish, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress arise. This is its outcome.

When you pursue meditation on the feature of ugliness, revulsion at the
feature of beauty becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing impermanence in the six fields of contact,
revulsion at contact becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping
aggregates, revulsion at grasping becomes stabilized. This is its
outcome."

</article>

[]{#an5-sumanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Sumanā {#an5-sumanavagga.xhtml_an5-sumanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.31">

#### [AN 5.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sumanā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sumanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Princess Sumanā, escorted by five
hundred chariots and five hundred royal maidens, went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, suppose there were two disciples equal in faith, ethics, and
wisdom. One is a giver, one is not. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. When they have
become gods, would there be any distinction or difference between them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a god, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in five
respects: heavenly lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty.
As a god, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in these five
respects."

"But sir, if they pass away from there and come back to this place as
human beings, would there still be any distinction or difference between
them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a human being, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in
five respects: human lifespan, beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty.
As a human being, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in
these five respects."

"But sir, if they both go forth from the lay life to homelessness, would
there still be any distinction or difference between them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a renunciate, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in
five respects. They'd usually use only what they've been invited to
accept---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---rarely using them without invitation. When living with other
spiritual practitioners, they usually treat them agreeably by way of
body, speech, and mind, rarely disagreeably. As a renunciate, the one
who was a giver would surpass the other in these five respects."

"But sir, if they both attain perfection, as perfected ones would there
still be any distinction or difference between them?"

"In that case, I say there is no difference between the freedom of one
and the freedom of the other."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! This is quite enough to justify
giving gifts and making merit. For merit is helpful for those who have
become gods, human beings, and renunciates."

"That's so true, Sumanā. It's quite enough to justify giving gifts and
making merit. For merit is helpful for those who have become gods, human
beings, and renunciates."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "The moon so immaculate,\
> journeying across the dimension of space;\
> outshines with its radiance\
> all the world's stars.
>
> So too, a faithful individual,\
> perfect in ethics,\
> outshines with their generosity\
> all the world's stingy people.
>
> The thundering rain cloud,\
> its hundred peaks wreathed in lightning,\
> pours down over the rich earth,\
> soaking the uplands and valleys.
>
> Even so, an astute person accomplished in vision,\
> a disciple of the fully awakened Buddha,\
> surpasses a stingy person\
> in five respects:
>
> long life and fame,\
> beauty and happiness.\
> Lavished with riches,\
> they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.32">

#### [AN 5.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Cundī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cundīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove,
the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Princess Cundī, escorted by five
hundred chariots and five hundred royal maidens, went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, my brother, Prince Cunda, says this: 'Take a woman or man who goes
for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Only then do they get reborn in
a good place, not a bad place, when their body breaks up, after death.'
And so I ask the Buddha: Sir, what kind of teacher should you have
confidence in so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad place, when
the body breaks up, after death? Sir, what kind of teaching should you
have confidence in so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad place,
when the body breaks up, after death? Sir, what kind of Saṅgha should
you have confidence in so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad
place, when the body breaks up, after death? Sir, what kind of ethics
should you fulfill so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad place,
when the body breaks up, after death?"

"Cundī, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha,
is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they footless, with
two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with
perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. Those who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence
in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The noble eightfold path is said to be the best of all conditioned
things. Those who have confidence in the noble eightfold path have
confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the
best.

Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or
unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst,
the uprooting of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. Those who have
confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best.
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The Saṅgha of the Realized One's disciples is said to be the best of all
communities and groups. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world. Those who have confidence in the
Saṅgha have confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the
result is the best.

The ethical conduct loved by the noble ones is said to be the best of
all ethics. It is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred,
liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion. Those who fulfill the ethics loved by the noble ones fulfill
the best. Fulfilling the best, the result is the best.

> For those who, knowing the best teaching,\
> base their confidence on the best---\
> confident in the best Awakened One,\
> supremely worthy of a religious donation;
>
> confident in the best teaching,\
> the bliss of fading and stilling;\
> confident in the best Saṅgha,\
> the supreme field of merit---
>
> giving gifts to the best,\
> the best of merit grows:\
> the best lifespan, beauty,\
> fame, reputation, happiness, and strength.
>
> An intelligent person gives to the best,\
> settled on the best teaching.\
> When they become a god or human,\
> they rejoice at reaching the best."

</article>
<article id="an5.33">

#### [AN 5.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Uggaha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uggahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Bhaddiya, in Jātiyā Wood.

Then Uggaha, Meṇḍaka's grandson, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please accept
tomorrow's meal from me, together with three other monks." The Buddha
consented with silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented,
Uggaha got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then when the night had passed, the Buddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went to Uggaha's home, where he sat on the
seat spread out. Then Uggaha served and satisfied the Buddha with his
own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Uggaha sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, these girls of mine will be going to
their husbands' families. May the Buddha please advise and instruct
them. It will be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

Then the Buddha said to those girls:

"So, girls, you should train like this: 'Our parents will give us to a
husband wanting what's best, out of kindness and sympathy. We will get
up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely
and speaking politely.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'Those our husband
respects---mother and father, ascetics and brahmins---we will honor,
respect, revere, and venerate, and serve with a seat and a drink when
they come as guests.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will be deft and tireless in
doing domestic duties for our husband, such as knitting and sewing. We
will have an understanding of how to go about things in order to
complete and organize the work.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will know what work our
husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and workers have completed,
and what they've left incomplete. We will know who is sick, and who is
fit or unwell. We will distribute to each a fair portion of fresh and
cooked foods.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will ensure that any income
our husbands earn is guarded and protected, whether money, grain,
silver, or gold. We will not overspend, steal, waste, or lose it.'
That's how you should train. When they have these five qualities,
females---when their body breaks up, after death---are reborn in company
with the gods of the lovable host.

> She'd never look down on her husband,\
> who's always eager to work hard,\
> always looking after her,\
> and bringing whatever she wants.
>
> And a good woman never scolds her husband\
> with jealous words.\
> Being astute, she reveres\
> those respected by her husband.
>
> She gets up early, works tirelessly,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> A lady who fulfills these duties\
> according to her husband's desire,\
> is reborn among the gods\
> called 'Lovable'."

</article>
<article id="an5.34">

#### [AN 5.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With General Sīha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhasenāpatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Then General Sīha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and asked him, "Sir, can you point out a fruit of giving that's apparent
in the present life?"

"I can, Sīha," said the Buddha.

"A giver, a donor is dear and beloved to many people. This is a fruit of
giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, true persons associate with a giver. This is another fruit
of giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, a giver gains a good reputation. This is another fruit of
giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, a giver enters any kind of assembly bold and assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is another fruit of giving that's apparent in the present
life.

Furthermore, when a giver's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is a fruit of giving to do with
lives to come."

When he said this, General Sīha said to the Buddha, "When it comes to
those four fruits of giving that are apparent in the present life, I
don't have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too. I'm a
giver, a donor, and am dear and beloved to many people. I'm a giver, and
true persons associate with me. I'm a giver, and I have this good
reputation: 'General Sīha gives, serves, and attends on the Saṅgha.' I'm
a giver, and I enter any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether it's
an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics. When it
comes to these four fruits of giving that are apparent in the present
life, I don't have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too.
But when the Buddha says: 'When a giver's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' I don't know this, so
I have to rely on faith in the Buddha."

"That's so true, Sīha! That's so true! When a giver's body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

> Giving, you're loved and befriended by many people.\
> You get a good reputation, and your fame grows.\
> A generous man enters an assembly\
> bold and assured.
>
> So an astute person, seeking happiness, `<j>`{=html}would give gifts,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> having driven out the stain of stinginess.\
> They live long in the heaven of the Three and Thirty,\
> enjoying the company of the gods.
>
> Having taken the opportunity to do good, `<j>`{=html}when they pass
> from here `</j>`{=html}\
> they wander radiant in the Garden of Delight.\
> There they delight, rejoice, and enjoy themselves,\
> provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation.\
> Having practiced the word of the unattached, the unaffected,\
> disciples of the Holy One rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.35">

#### [AN 5.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Giving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānānisaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five benefits of giving. What five? A giver, a
donor is dear and beloved by many people. True persons associate with
them. They get a good reputation. They don't neglect a layperson's
duties. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. These are the five benefits of giving.

> Giving, one is loved,\
> and follows the way of the good.\
> The good, disciplined spiritual practitioners\
> associate with you.
>
> They teach you the Dhamma\
> that dispels all suffering.\
> Having understood this teaching,\
> the undefiled become fully quenched."

</article>
<article id="an5.36">

#### [AN 5.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Timely Gifts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāladānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five timely gifts. What five? A gift to a
visitor. A gift to someone setting out on a journey. A gift to someone
who is sick. A gift at a time of famine. Presenting the freshly
harvested grains and fruits first to those who are ethical. These are
the five timely gifts.

> The wise give at the right time,\
> being bountiful and rid of stinginess.\
> A religious donation at the right time\
> to the noble ones, upright and unaffected,
>
> given with a clear and confident mind,\
> is indeed abundant.\
> Those who rejoice at that,\
> or do other services,\
> don't miss out on the offering;\
> they too have a share in the merit.
>
> So you should give without holding back,\
> where a gift is very fruitful.\
> The good deeds of sentient beings\
> support them in the next world."

</article>
<article id="an5.37">

#### [AN 5.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Food ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a giver gives food, they give the recipients five
things. What five? Long life, beauty, happiness, strength, and
eloquence.

Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human.

Giving beauty, they have beauty as a god or human.

Giving happiness, they have happiness as a god or human.

Giving strength, they have strength as a god or human.

Giving eloquence, they are eloquent as a god or human.

When a giver gives food, they give the recipients five things.

> A wise one is a giver of life, strength,\
> beauty, and eloquence.\
> An intelligent giver of happiness\
> gains happiness in return.
>
> Giving life, strength, beauty,\
> happiness, and eloquence,\
> they're long-lived and famous\
> wherever they're reborn."

</article>
<article id="an5.38">

#### [AN 5.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faith ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a faithful gentleman gets five benefits. What five? The
true persons in the world show sympathy first to the faithful, not so
much to the unfaithful. They first approach the faithful, not so much
the unfaithful. They first receive alms from the faithful, not so much
the unfaithful. They first teach Dhamma to the faithful, not so much the
unfaithful. When their body breaks up, after death, the faithful are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. A faithful gentleman gets
these five benefits.

Suppose there was a great banyan tree at a level crossroads. It would
become a refuge for birds from all around. In the same way, a faithful
gentleman becomes a refuge for many people---monks, nuns, laywomen, and
laymen.

> With its branches, leaves, and fruit,\
> a great tree with its strong trunk,\
> firmly-rooted and fruit-bearing,\
> supports many birds.
>
> It's a lovely place,\
> frequented by the sky-soarers.\
> Those that need shade go in the shade,\
> those that need fruit enjoy the fruit.
>
> So too, a faithful individual\
> is perfect in ethics,\
> humble and amenable,\
> sweet, courteous, and tender.
>
> Those free of greed, freed of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled,\
> fields of merit for the world,\
> associate with such a person.
>
> They teach them the Dhamma,\
> that dispels all suffering.\
> Having understood this teaching,\
> the undefiled become fully quenched."

</article>
<article id="an5.39">

#### [AN 5.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Child ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, parents see five reasons to wish for the birth of a child
in the family. What five? Since we looked after them, they'll look after
us. They'll do their duty for us. The family traditions will last.
They'll take care of the inheritance. Or else when we have passed away
they'll give an offering on our behalf. Parents see these five reasons
to wish for the birth of a child in the family.

> Seeing five reasons,\
> astute people wish for a child.\
> Since we looked after them, they'll look after us.\
> They'll do their duty for us.
>
> The family traditions will last.\
> They'll take care of the inheritance.\
> Or else when we have passed away\
> they'll give an offering on our behalf.
>
> Seeing these five reasons\
> astute people wish for a child.\
> And so true persons,\
> grateful and thankful,
>
> look after their parents,\
> remembering past deeds.\
> They do for their parents,\
> as their parents did for them in the past.
>
> Following their advice, `<j>`{=html}looking after those who raised
> them, `</j>`{=html}\
> the family traditions are not lost.\
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> such a child is praiseworthy."

</article>
<article id="an5.40">

#### [AN 5.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Great Sal Trees ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsālaputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, great sal trees grow in five ways supported by the
Himalayas, the king of mountains. What five? The branches, leaves, and
foliage; the bark; the shoots; the softwood; and the hardwood. Great sal
trees grow in these five ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of
mountains.

In the same way, a family grows in five ways supported by a family head
with faith. What five? Faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
A family grows in these five ways supported by a family head with faith.

> Supported by the mountain crags\
> in the wilds, the formidable forest,\
> the tree grows\
> to become lord of the forest.
>
> So too, when the family head\
> is ethical and faithful,\
> supported by them, they grow:\
> children, partners, and kin,\
> colleagues, relatives,\
> and those dependent for their livelihood.
>
> Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous,\
> the generosity and good deeds,\
> those who see clearly\
> do likewise.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> the path that goes to a good place,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

</article>

[]{#an5-mundarajavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with King Muṇḍa {#an5-mundarajavagga.xhtml_an5-mundarajavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.41">

#### [AN 5.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Getting Rich ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ādiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, there are these five reasons to get rich. What five?

Firstly, with his legitimate wealth---earned by his efforts and
initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the
brow---a noble disciple makes himself happy and pleased, keeping himself
properly happy. He makes his mother and father happy ... He makes his
children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff happy ... This is
the first reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes his friends and
colleagues happy ... This is the second reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he protects himself against
losses from such things as fire, water, kings, bandits, or unloved
heirs. He keeps himself safe. This is the third reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings:
to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. This is the fourth
reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting
religious donation for ascetics and brahmins---those who avoid
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves---that's conducive to heaven,
ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. This is the fifth reason to
get rich.

These are the five reasons to get rich.

Now if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons run out,
he thinks: 'So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are running
out.' And so he has no regrets.

But if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons increase,
he thinks: 'So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are
increasing.' And so he has no regrets in both cases.

> 'I've enjoyed my wealth, `<j>`{=html}supporting those who depend on
> me; `</j>`{=html}\
> I've overcome losses;\
> I've given uplifting religious donations;\
> and made the five spirit-offerings.\
> I have looked after the ethical and\
> disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> I've achieved the purpose\
> for which an astute lay person\
> wishes to gain wealth.\
> I don't regret what I've done.'
>
> A mortal person who recollects this\
> stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones.\
> They're praised in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.42">

#### [AN 5.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a true person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of the people. For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
mother and father; children and partners; bondservants, workers, and
staff; friends and colleagues; and ascetics and brahmins.

It's like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. In the same way, a true
person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
the people. ...

> The gods protect one who is guarded by principle,\
> who uses their wealth for the welfare of the many.\
> One who is learned, `<j>`{=html}with precepts and observances intact,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> and steady in principle, doesn't lose their reputation.
>
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious;\
> like a pendant of Black Plum River gold,\
> who is worthy to criticize them?\
> Even the gods praise them,\
> and by Brahmā, too, they're praised."

</article>
<article id="an5.43">

#### [AN 5.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Likable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Iṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, these five things, which are likable, desirable, and
agreeable are hard to get in the world. What five? Long life, beauty,
happiness, fame, and heaven. These are the five things, which are
likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world.

And I say that these five things are not got by praying or wishing for
them. If they were, who would lack them?

A noble disciple who wants to live long ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to long life. For by practicing that way they gain long life as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be beautiful ought not pray for it, or
hope for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that
leads to beauty. For by practicing that way they gain beauty as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be happy ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to happiness. For by practicing that way they gain happiness as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be famous ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to fame. For by practicing that way they gain fame as a god or a human
being.

A noble disciple who wants to go to heaven ought not pray for it, or
hope for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that
leads to heaven. For by practicing that way they gain heaven, they are
one who gains the heavens.

> For one who desires a continuous flow\
> of exceptional delights---\
> long life, beauty, fame and reputation,\
> heaven, and birth in an eminent family---
>
> the astute praise diligence\
> in making merit.\
> Being diligent, an astute person\
> secures both benefits:
>
> the benefit in this life,\
> and in lives to come.\
> A wise one, comprehending the meaning,\
> is called 'astute'."

</article>
<article id="an5.44">

#### [AN 5.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Agreeable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Manāpadāyīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then the Buddha robed up in the morning
and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Ugga
of Vesālī, where he sat on the seat spread out.

Then Ugga went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: 'The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable.' My sal flower
porridge is agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from me out of
sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'The
giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable.' My pork with jujube is
agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from me out of sympathy." So
the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"... My fried vegetable stalks are agreeable: may the Buddha please
accept them from me out of sympathy." So the Buddha accepted them out of
sympathy.

"... My boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with
many soups and sauces is agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from
me out of sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"... My cloths imported from Kāsi are agreeable: may the Buddha please
accept them from me out of sympathy." So the Buddha accepted them out of
sympathy.

"... My couch spread with woolen covers---shag-piled or embroidered with
flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
pillows at both ends is agreeable. But, sir, I know that this is not
proper for the Buddha. However, this plank of sandalwood is worth over a
thousand dollars. May the Buddha please accept it from me out of
sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

And then the Buddha rejoiced with Ugga with these verses of
appreciation:

> "The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable,\
> enthusiastically giving clothing, bedding,\
> food and drink, and various requisites\
> to those of upright conduct.
>
> Knowing the perfected ones to be like a field\
> for what's given, offered and not held back,\
> a true person gives what's hard to give:\
> the giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable."

And then the Buddha, having rejoiced with Ugga with these verses of
appreciation, got up from his seat and left.

Then after some time Ugga passed away, and was reborn in a host of
mind-made gods. At that time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Ugga, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The
Buddha said to him, "Ugga, I trust it is all you wished?"

"Sir, it is indeed just as I wished." Then the Buddha addressed Ugga in
verse:

> "The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable,\
> the giver of the foremost gets the foremost,\
> the giver of the excellent gets the excellent,\
> the giver of the best gets the best.
>
> A person who gives the foremost,\
> the excellent, the best:\
> they're long-lived and famous\
> wherever they're reborn."

</article>
<article id="an5.45">

#### [AN 5.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overflowing Merit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puññābhisandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to
heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

What five? When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion
of heart while using a robe ... almsfood ... lodging ... bed and chair
... medicines and supplies for the sick, the overflowing of merit for
the donor is limitless ...

These are the five kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness.
They nurture happiness, and are conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness, and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

When a noble disciple has these five kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to grasp how much merit they have by saying that
this is the extent of their overflowing merit ... that leads to
happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great
mass of merit.

It's like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It's not easy
to say: 'This is how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands,
hundreds of thousands of gallons there are.' It's simply reckoned as an
incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water.

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these five kinds of
overflowing merit and goodness, it's not easy to grasp how much merit
they have: 'This is how much this overflowing merit ... leads to
happiness.' It's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great
mass of merit.

> Hosts of people use the rivers,\
> and though the rivers are many,\
> all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,\
> the cruel sea that's home to precious gems.
>
> So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes;\
> and they're a giver of beds, seats, and mats---\
> the streams of merit reach that astute person,\
> as the rivers bring their waters to the sea."

</article>
<article id="an5.46">

#### [AN 5.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Success ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. These are the five
accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an5.47">

#### [AN 5.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wealth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of wealth. What five? The wealth
of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.

And what is the wealth of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the wealth of faith.

And what is the wealth of ethics? It's when a noble disciple doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called the wealth of
ethics.

And what is the wealth of learning? It's when a noble disciple is very
learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These teachings
are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is called the wealth of learning.

And what is the wealth of generosity? It's when a noble disciple lives
at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called the wealth of generosity.

And what is the wealth of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the wealth of wisdom.

These are the five kinds of wealth.

> Whoever has faith in the Realized One,\
> unwavering and well grounded;\
> whose ethical conduct is good,\
> praised and loved by the noble ones;
>
> who has confidence in the Saṅgha,\
> and correct view:\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an5.48">

#### [AN 5.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Cannot Be Had ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Alabbhanīyaṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. What five?
That someone liable to old age should not grow old. That someone liable
to sickness should not get sick. ... That someone liable to death should
not die. ... That someone liable to ending should not end. ... That
someone liable to perishing should not perish. ...

An unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to old age who grows
old. But they don't reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has
someone liable to old age who grows old. For as long as sentient beings
come and go, pass away and are reborn, they all have someone liable to
old age who grows old. If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating
my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old
age grows old, I'd lose my appetite and my physical appearance would
deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged,
and my friends would be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old
age grows old, they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. This is called an unlearned ordinary person
struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves.

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to sickness
... death ... ending ... perishing. But they don't reflect on perishing:
'It's not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For
as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn, they
all have someone liable to perishing who perishes. If I were to sorrow
and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just
because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose my appetite and
my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is called
an unlearned ordinary person struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only
mortifies themselves.

A learned noble disciple has someone liable to old age who grows old. So
they reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has someone liable to old
age who grows old. For as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away
and are reborn, they all have someone liable to old age who grows old.
If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling
into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows old, I'd
lose my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out
sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only
mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

Furthermore, a learned noble disciple has someone liable to sickness ...
death ... ending ... perishing. So they reflect on perishing: 'It's not
just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For as long as
sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn, they all have
someone liable to perishing who perishes. If I were to sorrow and wail
and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because
someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose my appetite and my
physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they don't sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This
is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out sorrow's poisoned
arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only mortify
themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

These are the five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.

> Sorrowing and lamenting\
> doesn't do even a little bit of good.\
> When they know that you're sad,\
> your enemies are encouraged.
>
> When an astute person doesn't waver `<j>`{=html}in the face of
> adversity, `</j>`{=html}\
> as they're able to evaluate what's beneficial,\
> their enemies suffer,\
> seeing that their normal expression doesn't change.
>
> Chants, recitations, fine sayings,\
> charity or traditions:\
> if by means of any such things you benefit,\
> then by all means keep doing them.
>
> But if you understand that 'this good thing\
> can't be had by me or by anyone else',\
> you should accept it without sorrowing, thinking:\
> 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

</article>
<article id="an5.49">

#### [AN 5.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The King of Kosala ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kosalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.

Then a man went up to the king and whispered in his ear, "Your Majesty,
Queen Mallikā has passed away."

When this was said, King Pasenadi was miserable and sad. He sat with his
shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Great king, there are five things
that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or
by anyone in the world. What five? That someone liable to old age should
not grow old. ... Sorrowing and lamenting doesn't do even a little bit
of good ... 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

</article>
<article id="an5.50">

#### [AN 5.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nārada ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāradasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Nārada was staying near Pāṭaliputta, in the
Chicken Monastery.

Now at that time King Muṇḍa's dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā had just
passed away. And since that time, the king did not bathe, anoint
himself, eat his meals, or apply himself to his work. Day and night he
brooded over Queen Bhaddā's corpse.

Then King Muṇḍa addressed his treasurer, Piyaka,

"So, my good Piyaka, please place Queen Bhaddā's corpse in an iron case
filled with oil. Then close it up with another case, so that we can view
Queen Bhaddā's body even longer."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka the treasurer, and he did as the
king instructed.

Then it occurred to Piyaka, "King Muṇḍa's dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā
has passed away. Since then the king does not bathe, anoint himself, eat
his meals, or apply himself to his work. Day and night he broods over
Queen Bhaddā's corpse. Now, what ascetic or brahmin might the king pay
homage to, whose teaching could help the king give up sorrow's arrow?"

Then it occurred to Piyaka, "This Venerable Nārada is staying in the
Chicken Monastery at Pāṭaliputta. He has this good reputation: 'He is
astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent,
mature, a perfected one.' What if King Muṇḍa was to pay homage to
Venerable Nārada? Hopefully when he hears Nārada's teaching, the king
could give up sorrow's arrow."

Then Piyaka went to the king and said to him, "Sire, this Venerable
Nārada is staying in the Chicken Monastery at Pāṭaliputta. He has this
good reputation: 'He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a
brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.' What if Your
Majesty was to pay homage to Venerable Nārada? Hopefully when you hear
Nārada's teaching, you could give up sorrow's arrow."

"Well then, my good Piyaka, let Nārada know. For how could one such as I
presume to visit an ascetic or brahmin in my realm without first letting
them know?"

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka the treasurer. He went to Nārada,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, King Muṇḍa's dear
and beloved Queen Bhaddā has passed away. And since she passed away, the
king has not bathed, anointed himself, eaten his meals, or got his
business done. Day and night he broods over Queen Bhaddā's corpse. Sir,
please teach the king so that, when he hears your teaching, he can give
up sorrow's arrow."

"Please, Piyaka, let the king come when he likes."

Then Piyaka got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
Venerable Nārada, keeping him on his right, before going to the king and
saying, "Sire, the request for an audience with Venerable Nārada has
been granted. Please, Your Majesty, go at your convenience."

"Well then, my good Piyaka, harness the finest chariots."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka the treasurer. He did so, then told
the king:

"Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please, Your Majesty, go at
your convenience."

Then King Muṇḍa mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out in full royal pomp to see Venerable Nārada at the
Chicken Monastery. He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed,
then descended and entered the monastery on foot. Then the king went up
to Nārada, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Nārada said to him:

"Great king, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. What five?
That someone liable to old age should not grow old. ... That someone
liable to sickness should not get sick. ... That someone liable to death
should not die. ... That someone liable to ending should not end. ...
That someone liable to perishing should not perish. ...

An unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to old age who grows
old. But they don't reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has
someone liable to old age who grows old. For all sentient beings have
someone liable to old age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come
and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were to sorrow and wail and
lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because
someone liable to old age grows old, I'd lose my appetite and my
physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is called
an unlearned ordinary person struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only
mortifies themselves.

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to sickness
... death ... ending ... perishing. But they don't reflect on perishing:
'It's not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For
all sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as
long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were
to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into
confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose
my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called an unlearned ordinary person struck by
sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves.

A learned noble disciple has someone liable to old age who grows old. So
they reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has someone liable to old
age who grows old. For all sentient beings have someone liable to old
age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and
are reborn. If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast
and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows
old, I'd lose my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate.
My work wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my
friends would be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old age
grows old, they don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast
and falling into confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who
has drawn out sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned
ordinary people only mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns,
that noble disciple only extinguishes themselves.

Furthermore, a learned noble disciple has someone liable to sickness ...
death ... ending ... perishing. So they reflect on perishing: 'It's not
just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For all
sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as long
as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were to
sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into
confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose
my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out
sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only
mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

These are the five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.

> Sorrowing and lamenting\
> doesn't do even a little bit of good.\
> When they know that you're sad,\
> your enemies are encouraged.
>
> When an astute person doesn't waver `<j>`{=html}in the face of
> adversity, `</j>`{=html}\
> as they're able to evaluate what's beneficial,\
> their enemies suffer,\
> seeing that their normal expression doesn't change.
>
> Chants, recitations, fine sayings,\
> charity or traditions:\
> if by means of any such things you benefit,\
> then by all means keep doing them.
>
> But if you understand that 'this good thing\
> can't be had by me or by anyone else',\
> you should accept it without sorrowing, thinking:\
> 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

When he said this, King Muṇḍa said to Venerable Nārada, "Sir, what is
the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"Great king, this exposition of the teaching is called 'Pulling Out
Sorrow's Arrow'."

"Indeed, sir, this is the pulling out of sorrow's arrow! Hearing this
exposition of the teaching, I've given up sorrow's arrow."

Then King Muṇḍa addressed his treasurer, Piyaka, "Well then, my good
Piyaka, cremate Queen Bhaddā's corpse and build a monument. From this
day forth, I will bathe, anoint myself, eat my meals, and apply myself
to my work."

</article>

[]{#an5-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an5-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an5-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Hindrances {#an5-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an5-nivaranavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.51">

#### [AN 5.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Obstacles ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āvaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of
the mind that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire ... Ill will ...
Dullness and drowsiness ... Restlessness and remorse ... Doubt ... These
are the five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken
wisdom.

Take a mendicant who has feeble and weak wisdom, not having given up
these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken
wisdom. It is quite impossible that they would know what's for their own
good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would
realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones.

Suppose there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly, going far,
carrying all before it. But then a man would open channels on both
sides, so the mid-river current would be dispersed, displaced, and
separated. The river would no longer flow swiftly, going far, carrying
all before it.

In the same way, take a mendicant who has feeble and weak wisdom, not
having given up these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the
mind that weaken wisdom. It is not possible that they would know what's
for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that
they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones.

Take a mendicant who has powerful wisdom, having given up these five
obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom. It's
quite possible that they would know what's for their own good, the good
of another, or the good of both; or that they would realize any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

Suppose there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly, going far,
carrying all before it. But then a man would close up the channels on
both sides, so the mid-river current would not be dispersed, displaced,
and separated. The river would keep flowing swiftly for a long way,
carrying all before it.

In the same way, take a mendicant who has powerful wisdom, having given
up these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that
weaken wisdom. It's quite possible that they would know what's for their
own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would
realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones."

</article>
<article id="an5.52">

#### [AN 5.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Heap of the Unskillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalarāsisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, rightly speaking, you'd call the five hindrances a 'heap of
the unskillful'. For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the
unskillful. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Rightly
speaking, you'd call these five hindrances a 'heap of the unskillful'.
For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful."

</article>
<article id="an5.53">

#### [AN 5.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Factors That Support Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Padhāniyaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five factors that support meditation. What
five?

It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

They're not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the
Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

These are the five factors that support meditation."

</article>
<article id="an5.54">

#### [AN 5.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Times Good for Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five times that are not good for meditation. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant is old, overcome with old age. This is the first
time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, a mendicant is sick, overcome by sickness. This is the
second time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's a famine, a bad harvest, so it's hard to get
almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting alms. This is the
third time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the
countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. This is the fourth
time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's a schism in the Saṅgha. When the Saṅgha is split,
they abuse, insult, block, and reject each other. This doesn't inspire
confidence in those without it, and it causes some with confidence to
change their minds. This is the fifth time that's not good for
meditation.

These are the five times that are not good for meditation.

There are five times that are good for meditation. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant is a youth, young, with pristine black hair,
blessed with youth, in the prime of life. This is the first time that's
good for meditation.

Furthermore, they are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well,
being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for
meditation. This is the second time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's plenty of food, a good harvest, so it's easy to get
almsfood, and easy to keep going by collecting alms. This is the third
time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, people live in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly eyes. This is the fourth time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each
other, without quarreling, with one recitation. When the Saṅgha is in
harmony, they don't abuse, insult, block, or reject each other. This
inspires confidence in those without it, and increases confidence in
those who have it. This is the fifth time that's good for meditation.

These are the five times that are good for meditation."

</article>
<article id="an5.55">

#### [AN 5.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mother and Son ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mātāputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now, at that time a mother and son had both entered the rainy season
residence at Sāvatthī, as a monk and a nun. They wanted to see each
other often. The mother wanted to see her son often, and the son his
mother. Seeing each other often, they became close. Being so close, they
became intimate. And being intimate, lust overcame them. With their
minds swamped by lust, without resigning the training and declaring
their inability to continue, they had sex.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, how could that futile man imagine that a mother cannot lust
for her son, or that a son cannot lust for his mother? Compared to the
sight of a woman, I do not see a single sight that is so arousing,
sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, and infatuating, and such an
obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Sentient
beings are lustful, greedy, tied, infatuated, and attached to the sight
of a woman. They sorrow for a long time under the sway of a woman's
sight.

Compared to the sound ... smell ... taste ... touch of a woman, I do not
see a single touch that is so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating,
captivating, and infatuating, and such an obstacle to reaching the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Sentient beings are lustful, greedy,
tied, infatuated, and attached to the touch of a woman. They sorrow for
a long time under the sway of a woman's touch.

When a woman walks, she occupies a man's mind. When a woman stands ...
sits ... lies down ... laughs ... speaks ... sings ... cries ... is
injured, she occupies a man's mind. Even when a woman is dead, she
occupies a man's mind. For if anyone should be rightly called 'an
all-round snare of Māra', it's females.

> You might chat with someone who has knife in hand.\
> You might even chat with a goblin.\
> You might sit close by a viper,\
> whose bite would take your life.\
> But never should you chat\
> one on one with a female.
>
> They captivate the unmindful\
> with a glance and a smile.\
> Or scantily clad,\
> they speak charming words.\
> It's not good to sit with such a person,\
> even if she's injured or dead.
>
> These five kinds of sensual stimulation\
> are apparent in a woman's body:\
> sights, sounds, tastes, smells,\
> and touches so delightful.
>
> Those swept away by the flood of sensual pleasures,\
> not comprehending them,\
> are governed by transmigration---\
> time and destination, and life after life.
>
> But those who fully understand sensual pleasures\
> live fearing nothing from any quarter.\
> They are those in the world who've crossed over,\
> having reached the ending of defilements."

</article>
<article id="an5.56">

#### [AN 5.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mentor ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upajjhāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to his own mentor, and said, "Now, sir, my body
feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, the teachings don't spring
to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill my mind. I lead the spiritual
life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings."

Then that mendicant took his pupil to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, this mendicant says this: 'Now, sir, my
body feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, the teachings don't
spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill my mind. I lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings.'"

"That's how it is, mendicant, when your sense doors are unguarded, you
eat too much, you're not dedicated to wakefulness, you're unable to
discern skillful qualities, and you don't pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Your
body feels like it's drugged. You're disorientated, the teachings don't
spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill your mind. You lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings.

So you should train like this: 'I will guard my sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

When that mendicant had been given this advice by the Buddha, he got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

When that mendicant had attained perfection, he went up to his own
mentor, and said, "Now, sir, my body doesn't feel like it's drugged. I'm
not disorientated, the teachings spring to mind, and dullness and
drowsiness don't fill my mind. I lead the spiritual life satisfied, and
have no doubts about the teachings."

Then that mendicant took his pupil to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, this mendicant says this: 'Now, sir, my
body doesn't feel like it's drugged. I'm not disorientated, the
teachings spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness don't fill my
mind. I lead the spiritual life satisfied, and have no doubts about the
teachings.'"

"That's how it is, mendicant, when your sense doors are guarded, you're
moderate in eating, you're dedicated to wakefulness, you're able to
discern skillful qualities, and you pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Your
body doesn't feel like it's drugged. You're not disorientated, the
teachings spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness don't fill your
mind. You lead the spiritual life satisfied, and have no doubts about
the teachings.

So you should train like this: 'We will guard our sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an5.57">

#### [AN 5.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Subjects for Regular Reviewing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhiṇhapaccavekkhitabbaṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate should often
review these five subjects. What five?

'I am liable to grow old, I am not exempt from old age.' A woman or a
man, a layperson or a renunciate should often review this.

'I am liable to get sick, I am not exempt from sickness.' ...

'I am liable to die, I am not exempt from death.' ...

'I must be parted and separated from all I hold dear and beloved.' ...

'I am the owner of my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my
relative, and my refuge.

I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do, whether good or bad.' A
woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate should often review this.

What is the advantage for a woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate
of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to grow old, I am not exempt from
old age'? There are sentient beings who, intoxicated with the vanity of
youth, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. Reviewing this
subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of youth, or at least
reduce it. This is the advantage for a woman or a man, a layperson or a
renunciate of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to grow old, I am not
exempt from old age'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to get sick,
I am not exempt from sickness'? There are sentient beings who, drunk on
the vanity of health, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind.
Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of
health, or at least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing
this: 'I am liable to get sick, I am not exempt from sickness'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to die, I am
not exempt from death'? There are sentient beings who, drunk on the
vanity of life, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind.
Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of life,
or at least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I
am liable to die, I am not exempt from death'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I must be parted and
separated from all I hold dear and beloved'? There are sentient beings
who, aroused by desire and lust for their dear and beloved, do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. Reviewing this subject often,
they entirely give up desire and lust for their dear and beloved, or at
least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I must
be parted and separated from all I hold dear and beloved'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing like this: 'I am the owner of
my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my relative, and my
refuge. I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do, whether good or
bad'? There are sentient beings who do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up
bad conduct, or at least reduce it. This is the advantage for a woman or
a man, a layperson or a renunciate of often reviewing like this: 'I am
the owner of my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my
relative, and my refuge. I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do,
whether good or bad.'

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'It's not just me who is liable to
grow old, not being exempt from old age. For all sentient beings grow
old according to their nature, as long as they come and go, pass away
and are reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born
in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they
give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who is liable to get sick, not being exempt from
sickness. For all sentient beings get sick according to their nature, as
long as they come and go, pass away and are reborn.' When they review
this subject often, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop,
and make much of it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate
the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who is liable to die, not being exempt from death. For
all sentient beings die according to their nature, as long as they come
and go, pass away and are reborn.' When they review this subject often,
the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it.
By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

'It's not just me who must be parted and separated from all I hold dear
and beloved. For all sentient beings must be parted and separated from
all they hold dear and beloved, as long as they come and go, pass away
and are reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born
in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they
give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who shall be the owner of my deeds and heir to my
deeds. For all sentient beings shall be the owners of their deeds and
heirs to their deeds, as long as they come and go, pass away and are
reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born in them.
They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they give up
the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

> For others, sickness is natural,\
> and so are old age and death.\
> Though this is how their nature is,\
> ordinary people feel disgusted.
>
> If I were to be disgusted\
> with creatures whose nature is such,\
> it would not be appropriate for me,\
> since my life is just the same.
>
> Living in such a way,\
> I understood the truth without attachments.\
> I mastered all vanities---\
> of health, of youth,
>
> and even of life---\
> seeing renunciation as sanctuary.\
> Zeal sprang up in me\
> as I looked to extinguishment.
>
> Now I'm unable\
> to indulge in sensual pleasures;\
> there's no turning back,\
> I'm committed to the spiritual life."

</article>
<article id="an5.58">

#### [AN 5.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Licchavi Youths ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Licchavikumārakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he plunged deep into the Great Wood and sat at the root of a
tree for the day's meditation.

Now at that time several Licchavi youths took strung bows and, escorted
by a pack of hounds, were going for a walk in the Great Wood when they
saw the Buddha seated at the root of a tree. When they saw him, they put
down their strung bows, tied their hounds up to one side, and went up to
him. They bowed and silently paid homage to the Buddha with joined
palms.

Now at that time Mahānāma the Licchavi was going for a walk in the Great
Wood when he saw those Licchavi youths silently paying homage to the
Buddha with joined palms. Seeing this, he went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment, "They will
become Vajjis! They will become Vajjis!"

"But Mahānāma, why do you say that they will become Vajjis?"

"Sir, these Licchavi youths are violent, harsh, and brash. Whenever
sweets are left out for families---sugar-cane, jujube fruits, pancakes,
pies, or fritters---they filch them and eat them up. And they hit women
and girls of good families on their backs. But now they're silently
paying homage to the Buddha with joined palms."

"Mahānāma, you can expect only growth, not decline, when you find five
qualities in any gentleman---whether he's an anointed aristocratic king,
an appointed or hereditary official, an army general, a village chief, a
guild chief, or a ruler of his own clan.

What five?

Firstly, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth---earned by his efforts
and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of
the brow---to honor, respect, esteem, and venerate his mother and
father. Honored in this way, his mother and father love him with a good
heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a
gentleman is loved by his mother and father, you can expect only growth,
not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate his wives and children, bondservants, workers, and
staff. Honored in this way, his wives and children, bondservants,
workers, and staff love him with a good heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay
alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is loved by his wives and
children, bondservants, workers, and staff, you can expect only growth,
not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate those who work the neighboring fields, and those he
does business with. Honored in this way, those who work the neighboring
fields, and those he does business with love him with a good heart,
wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is
loved by those who work the neighboring fields, and those he does
business with, you can expect only growth, not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate the deities who receive spirit-offerings. Honored
in this way, the deities who receive spirit-offerings love him with a
good heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a
gentleman is loved by the deities, you can expect only growth, not
decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate ascetics and brahmins. Honored in this way,
ascetics and brahmins love him with a good heart, wishing: 'Live long!
Stay alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is loved by ascetics and
brahmins, you can expect only growth, not decline.

You can expect only growth, not decline, when you find these five
qualities in any gentleman---whether he's an anointed aristocratic king,
an appointed or hereditary official, an army general, a village chief, a
guild chief, or a ruler of his own clan.

> He's always dutiful to his mother and father,\
> and for the good of his wives and children.\
> He looks after those in his household,\
> and those dependent on him for their livelihood.
>
> A kind and ethical person\
> looks after the welfare of relatives---\
> both those who have passed away,\
> and those alive at present.
>
> While living at home, an astute person\
> uses legitimate means to give rise to joy\
> for ascetics, brahmins,\
> and also the gods.
>
> Having done good,\
> he's venerable and praiseworthy.\
> They praise him in this life,\
> and he departs to rejoice in heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.59">

#### [AN 5.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gone Forth When Old (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavuḍḍhapabbajitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five
qualities. What five? It's hard to find someone gone forth when old who
is sophisticated, well-presented, and learned, who can teach Dhamma, and
has memorized the monastic law. It's hard to find someone gone forth
when old who has these five qualities."

</article>
<article id="an5.60">

#### [AN 5.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gone Forth When Old (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavuḍḍhapabbajitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five
qualities. What five? It's hard to find someone gone forth when old who
is easy to admonish, retains what they learn, and learns respectfully,
who can teach the Dhamma, and has memorized the monastic law. It's hard
to find someone gone forth when old who has these five qualities."

</article>

[]{#an5-sannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Perceptions {#an5-sannavagga.xhtml_an5-sannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.61">

#### [AN 5.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of ugliness,
death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an5.62">

#### [AN 5.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of impermanence,
not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an5.63">

#### [AN 5.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Growth (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavaḍḍhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a male noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? He
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A male noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> He who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a good man such as he sees clearly,\
> and takes on what is essential for himself in this life."

</article>
<article id="an5.64">

#### [AN 5.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Growth (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavaḍḍhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? She
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A female noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> She who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> takes on what is essential for herself in this life."

</article>
<article id="an5.65">

#### [AN 5.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Discussion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sākacchasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

</article>
<article id="an5.66">

#### [AN 5.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sharing Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions posed when discussing accomplishment in the
knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

</article>
<article id="an5.67">

#### [AN 5.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bases of Psychic Power (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaiddhipādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five?

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to mental development, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort.

And the fifth is sheer vigor.

Any monk or nun who develops and cultivates these five qualities can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if
there's something left over, non-return."

</article>
<article id="an5.68">

#### [AN 5.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bases of Psychic Power (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaiddhipādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still not awake but intent
on awakening---I developed and cultivated five things. What five?

The basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
energy, and active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to mental development, and active effort ... the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And
the fifth is sheer vigor.

When I had developed and cultivated these five things, with vigor as
fifth, I extended the mind to realize by insight each and every thing
that can be realized by insight; and I was capable of realizing those
things, since each and every one was within range.

If I wished: 'May I multiply myself and become one again ... controlling
the body as far as the Brahmā realm.' I was capable of realizing it,
since each and every one is within range.

If I wished: ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' I was capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an5.69">

#### [AN 5.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disillusionment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbidāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an5.70">

#### [AN 5.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ending of Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsavakkhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to
the ending of defilements. What five? A mendicant meditates observing
the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives
dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all
conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death.
These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of
defilements."

</article>

[]{#an5-yodhajivavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Warrior {#an5-yodhajivavagga.xhtml_an5-yodhajivavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.71">

#### [AN 5.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamacetovimuttiphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death. These five things, when
developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as
their fruit and benefit. When a mendicant has freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom, such a mendicant is one who is called 'one who has
lifted the cross-bar', 'one who has filled in the moat', 'one who has
pulled up the pillar', 'one who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one
with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached'.

And how has a mendicant lifted the cross-bar? It's when a mendicant has
given up ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has lifted the cross-bar.

And how has a mendicant filled in the moat? It's when a mendicant has
given up transmigrating through births in future lives, cut it off at
the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to
arise in the future. That's how a mendicant has filled in the moat.

And how has a mendicant pulled up the pillar? It's when a mendicant has
given up craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has pulled up the pillar.

And how is a mendicant unimpeded? It's when a mendicant has given up the
five lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm
stump, obliterated them, so they're unable to arise in the future.
That's how a mendicant is unimpeded.

And how is a mendicant a noble one with with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached? It's when a mendicant has given up the conceit 'I
am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it,
so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant is a noble
one with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached."

</article>
<article id="an5.72">

#### [AN 5.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyacetovimuttiphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit. What
five?

The perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in
impermanence, the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of
giving up, and the perception of fading away.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

When a mendicant has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, such a
mendicant is one who is called 'one who has lifted the cross-bar', 'one
who has filled in the moat', 'one who has pulled up the pillar', 'one
who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.73">

#### [AN 5.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Who Lives by the Teaching (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamadhammavihārīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They
spend too much time studying that teaching. They neglect retreat, and
are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That mendicant is
called one who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. They spend too much time advocating that
teaching. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal
serenity of heart. That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not
one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. They spend too much time reciting that teaching. They
neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart.
That mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. They spend too much time thinking about that teaching. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That
mendicant is called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They don't spend too much
time studying that teaching. They don't neglect retreat, and they're
committed to internal serenity of heart. That's how a mendicant is one
who lives by the teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

</article>
<article id="an5.74">

#### [AN 5.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Who Lives by the Teaching (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyadhammavihārīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But
they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is called one
who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning.
That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not one who lives by
the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That
mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is
called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And they do understand
the higher meaning. That's how a mendicant is one who lives by the
teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

</article>
<article id="an5.75">

#### [AN 5.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Warriors (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamayodhājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud
of dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some
warriors are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust, but he
falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's crest. He doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are
like that. This is the third warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
Some warriors are like that. This is the fourth warrior found in the
world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world.

These are the five warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five?

Firstly, one monk falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud of
dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life.
Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns
to a lesser life. What is his 'cloud of dust'? It's when a monk hears:
'In such and such a village or town there's a women or a girl who is
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' Hearing this,
he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'cloud of dust'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who falters and founders at
the mere sight of a cloud of dust. Some people are like that. This is
the first person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust, but at the mere
sight of a banner's crest he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm,
and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to
continue training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. What is
his 'banner's crest'? It's when a monk doesn't hear: 'In such and such a
village or town there's a women or a girl who is attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' But he sees for himself a
women or a girl who is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. Seeing her, he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and
fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue
training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. This is his
'banner's crest'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust, but he falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's
crest. Some people are like that. This is the second person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring
his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns to a
lesser life. What is his 'turmoil'? It's when a mendicant who has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is
approached by a female. She smiles, chats, laughs, and teases him. He
falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'turmoil'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest, but he falters and founders at the mere
sound of turmoil. Some people are like that. This is the third person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
What is his 'blows are struck'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached
by a female. She sits right by him, lies down, or embraces him. Without
resigning the training and declaring his inability to continue, he has
sex. This is his 'blows are struck'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil, but is killed or injured when
blows are struck. Some people are like that. This is the fourth person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. What is his 'victory in
battle'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a wilderness, or to the
root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached by a female. She sits
right by him, lies down, or embraces him. But he disentangles and frees
himself, and goes wherever he wants. He frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he
sits down cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes
mindfulness in his presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, he
meditates with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of
covetousness. Giving up ill will and malevolence, he meditates with a
mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing
the mind of ill will. Giving up dullness and drowsiness, he meditates
with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful
and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up
restlessness and remorse, he meditates without restlessness, his mind
peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving
up doubt, he meditates having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about
skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. He gives up these five
hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. He truly
understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire
to be reborn, and ignorance. When it is freed, he knows it is freed.

He understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is his 'victory in battle'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins
victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some
people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a warrior
found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

</article>
<article id="an5.76">

#### [AN 5.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Warriors (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyayodhājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes kill him and finish him off. Some warriors
are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some warriors
are like that. This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. But he dies of his injuries
while in their care. Some warriors are like that. This is the third
warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. And while in their care, he
recovers from his injuries. Some warriors are like that. This is the
fourth warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world. These are the five
warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five? Firstly, a mendicant lives supported by a town or
village. He robes up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
enters a village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and
mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the
sense faculties. There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing
clothes. Lust infects his mind, and, without resigning the training and
declaring his inability to continue, he has sex.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is killed and finished
off by his foes. Some people are like that. This is the first person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' But while traveling on the
road, before he reaches the monastery he declares his inability to
continue training. He rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is taken to his relatives
for care, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some people
are like that. This is the second person similar to a warrior found
among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
similes of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'Reverends, even though the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give
little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all
the more full of drawbacks, I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I
declare my inability to continue training. I reject it and will return
to a lesser life.' Declaring his inability to continue training, he
rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who dies of his injuries
while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that. This is
the third person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
simile of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'I'll try, reverends, I'll struggle, I'll be happy. I won't now declare
my inability to continue training, reject it and return to a lesser
life.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who recovers from his
injuries while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that.
This is the fourth person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town, guarding body, speech, and mind, establishing mindfulness, and
restraining the sense faculties. Seeing a sight with his eyes, he
doesn't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, he practices
restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over
it. Hearing a sound with his ears ... Smelling an odor with his nose ...
Tasting a flavor with his tongue ... Feeling a touch with his body ...
Knowing an idea with his mind, he doesn't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, he practices restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. Then after the meal,
on his return from almsround, he frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. Gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down
cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes mindfulness in his
presence. He gives up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like this---purified,
bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. He truly
understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire
to be reborn, and ignorance. When freed, he knows 'it is freed'. He
understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who dons his sword and
shield, fastens his bow and arrows, and plunges into the thick of
battle. He wins victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in
battle. Some people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

</article>
<article id="an5.77">

#### [AN 5.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Future Perils (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaanāgatabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized.

What five? Firstly, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm
living alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might get bitten
by a snake, a scorpion, or a centipede. And if I died from that it would
be an obstacle to my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
This is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might stumble off a
cliff, or get food poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm,
or piercing winds. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
second future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter wild
beasts---a lion, a tiger, a leopard, a bear, or a hyena---which might
take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
third future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter youths
escaping a crime or on their way to commit one, and they might take my
life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my progress.
I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the fourth future
peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. But in a wilderness there are savage monsters who
might take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to
my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized."

</article>
<article id="an5.78">

#### [AN 5.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Future Perils (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaanāgatabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
What five?

A mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm a youth, young, with pristine black
hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. But there will come a
time when this body is struck with old age. When you're old, overcome by
old age, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and
it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing
happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That
way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though I'm old.' This
is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, I'm rarely ill or unwell.
My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. But there will come a time when this body
is struck with sickness. When you're sick, overcome by sickness, it's
not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy
to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before
that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better
preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving
the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even though I'm sick.' This is the second future
peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, there's plenty of food, a
good harvest, so it's easy to get almsfood, and easy to keep going by
collecting alms. But there will come a time of famine, a bad harvest,
when it's hard to get almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting
alms. In a time of famine, people move to where there's plenty of food,
where they live crowded and cramped together. When you live crowded and
cramped together, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the
Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
thing happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
That way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though there's a
famine.' This is the third future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, people live in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and
water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. But there will come a
time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount
their vehicles and flee everywhere. In a time of peril, people move to
where there's sanctuary, where they live crowded and cramped together.
When you live crowded and cramped together, it's not easy to focus on
the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before that unlikable,
undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better preempt it by
rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even in a time of peril.' This is the fourth
future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, the Saṅgha lives
comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling,
with one recitation. But there will come a time of schism in the Saṅgha.
When there is schism in the Saṅgha, it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before that unlikable,
undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better preempt it by
rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even though there's schism in the Saṅgha.' This is
the fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized."

</article>
<article id="an5.79">

#### [AN 5.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Future Perils (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaanāgatabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
ordain others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind,
and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. They too will ordain others, but be unable to guide
them in the higher ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop
their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the first future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
give dependence to others, but be unable to guide them in the higher
ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical
endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will give dependence to
others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind, and
wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
second future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. In
discussion about the teachings and elaborations they'll fall into dark
ideas without realizing it. And that is how corrupt training comes from
corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training.
This is the third future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. When
discourses spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent,
dealing with emptiness---are being recited they won't want to listen.
They won't actively listen or try to understand, nor will they think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited they will want to
listen. They'll actively listen and try to understand, and they'll think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the fourth future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. The senior
mendicants will be indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. Those who come
after them will follow their example. They too will become indulgent and
slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy
for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing
the unrealized. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them, and try to give
them up."

</article>
<article id="an5.80">

#### [AN 5.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Future Perils (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthaanāgatabhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
robes. They will neglect the practice of wearing rag robes and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get robes in many kinds
of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the first future peril that has
not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
almsfood. They will neglect the practice of walking for almsfood and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get almsfood in many
kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the second future peril
that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
lodgings. They will neglect the practice of staying at the root of a
tree and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital
cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get lodgings in
many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the third future
peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. In such conditions, it can be
expected that they will lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit
one of the corrupt offenses, or reject the training and return to a
lesser life. This is the fourth future peril that has not currently
arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with monastery attendants and novices. In such conditions it can be
expected that they will engage in storing up goods for their own use,
and making obvious hints about digging the earth and cutting plants.
This is the fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to give
them up."

</article>

[]{#an5-theravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Senior Mendicants {#an5-theravagga.xhtml_an5-theravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.81">

#### [AN 5.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Desirable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rajanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. What
five? They desire the desirable, they hate the hateful, they're deluded
by the delusory, they're annoyed by the annoying, and they're
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is unlikable and unlovable by their spiritual companions, not
respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't
desire the desirable, they don't hate the hateful, they're not deluded
by the delusory, they're not annoyed by the annoying, and they're not
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected
and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.82">

#### [AN 5.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Free of Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vītarāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. What
five? They're not free of greed, hate, and delusion; they are offensive
and contemptuous. A senior mendicant with these five qualities is
unlikable and unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or
admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're free of
greed, hate, and delusion; they're not offensive and contemptuous. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.83">

#### [AN 5.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deceiver ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kuhakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. What
five? They use deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and they use
material things to chase after other material things. A senior mendicant
with these five qualities is unlikable and unlovable to their spiritual
companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't use
deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't use material
things to chase after other material things. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.84">

#### [AN 5.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faithless ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assaddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. What
five? They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and unlovable to
their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're
faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. A senior
mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.85">

#### [AN 5.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cannot Endure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akkhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
unlovable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired. What
five? They can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and unlovable to
their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.86">

#### [AN 5.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Attaining the Methods of Textual Analysis ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭisambhidāpattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They have
attained the textual analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and
eloquence. And they are deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. A senior mendicant
with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual
companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.87">

#### [AN 5.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethical ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlavantasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice
that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.88">

#### [AN 5.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Senior Mendicants ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Therasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following that includes both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

But they have wrong view and distorted perspective. They draw many
people away from the true teaching and establish them in false
teachings.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

A senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following, including both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

And they have right view and an undistorted perspective. They draw many
people away from false teachings and establish them in the true
teaching.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an5.89">

#### [AN 5.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they don't review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things don't lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an5.90">

#### [AN 5.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee has many duties and responsibilities, and
is competent in many tasks. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the first thing that leads to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee spends too much time doing trivial
work. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that leads to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee mixes closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the third thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee enters the town at the wrong time, and
returns too late in the day. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that leads to
the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't get to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the fifth thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee doesn't have many duties and
responsibilities, even though they are competent in many tasks. They
don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart.
This is the first thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't waste their day doing trivial
work. They don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the third thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't enter the village too early or
return too late in the day. They don't neglect retreat, and are
committed to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that
doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee gets to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the fifth thing that doesn\'t lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>

[]{#an5-kakudhavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Kakudha {#an5-kakudhavagga.xhtml_an5-kakudhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.91">

#### [AN 5.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishments (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. These are the five
accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an5.92">

#### [AN 5.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishment (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. These are the five accomplishments."

</article>
<article id="an5.93">

#### [AN 5.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Declarations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byākaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five ways of declaring enlightenment. What five?
One declares enlightenment out of stupidity and folly. Or because of
corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of madness and
mental disorder. Or out of overestimation. Or one declares enlightenment
rightly. These are the five ways of declaring enlightenment."

</article>
<article id="an5.94">

#### [AN 5.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living Comfortably ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Phāsuvihārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?
It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. These are the five ways of living comfortably."

</article>
<article id="an5.95">

#### [AN 5.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unshakable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akuppasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five things will soon penetrate the
unshakable. What five? It's when a mendicant has attained the textual
analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and eloquence, and they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

</article>
<article id="an5.96">

#### [AN 5.96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Remembering What You've Learned ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sutadharasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

</article>
<article id="an5.97">

#### [AN 5.97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Talk ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kathāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They get to take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the
heart, when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That is, talk
about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, keeping your distance,
arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge
and vision of freedom.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

</article>
<article id="an5.98">

#### [AN 5.98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In the Wilderness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āraññakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant practicing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five? It's when a
mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is unburdensome and
contented with life's necessities. They eat little, not devoted to
filling their stomach. They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to
wakefulness. They live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. They
review the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant practicing
mindfulness of breathing who has these five things will soon penetrate
the unshakable."

</article>
<article id="an5.99">

#### [AN 5.99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. If he strikes an
elephant, he does it carefully, not carelessly. If he strikes a buffalo
... a cow ... a leopard ... or any smaller creatures---even a hare or a
cat---he does it carefully, not carelessly. Why is that? Thinking: 'May
I not lose my way.'

'Lion' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly,
this is his lion's roar. When the Realized One teaches the monks ...
nuns ... laymen ... laywomen ... or ordinary people---even food-carriers
and hunters---he teaches them carefully, not carelessly. Why is that?
Because the Realized One has respect and reverence for the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.100">

#### [AN 5.100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kakudha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kakudhatherasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

At that time the Koliyan named Kakudha---Venerable Mahāmoggallāna's
supporter---had recently passed away and been reborn in a certain host
of mind-made gods. He was reincarnated in a life-form that was two or
three times the size of a Magadhan village with its fields. But with
that life-form he didn't obstruct himself or others.

Then the god Kakudha went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, bowed, stood
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, this fixed desire arose in
Devadatta: 'I shall lead the mendicant Saṅgha.' And as that thought
arose, Devadatta lost that psychic power."

That's what the god Kakudha said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled
Mahāmoggallāna, keeping him on his right side, before vanishing right
there.

Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened.

"But Moggallāna, did you comprehend the god Kakudha's mind, and know
that everything he says is correct and not otherwise?"

"Indeed I did, sir."

"Mark these words, Moggallāna! Mark these words! Now that futile man
Devadatta will expose himself by his own deeds.

Moggallāna, there are these five teachers found in the world. What five?

Firstly, some teacher with impure conduct claims: 'I am pure in ethics.
My ethical conduct is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure ethical conduct, but claims to be
ethically pure. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's conduct, and the teacher expects
them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure livelihood claims: 'I am pure in
livelihood. My livelihood is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their
disciples know: 'This teacher has impure livelihood, but claims to have
pure livelihood. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's livelihood, and the teacher
expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure teaching claims: 'I am pure in
teaching. My teaching is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure teaching, but claims to have pure
teaching. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And
how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent
to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A
person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a
teacher cover up their teacher's teaching, and the teacher expects them
to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure answers claims: 'I am pure in how
I answer. My answers are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure answers, but claims to have pure answers.
They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's answers, and the teacher expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure knowledge and vision claims: 'I am
pure in knowledge and vision. My knowledge and vision are pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' But their disciples know: 'This teacher has impure
knowledge and vision, but claims to have pure knowledge and vision. They
wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's knowledge and vision, and the teacher expects
them to do so. These are the five teachers found in the world.

But Moggallāna, I have pure ethical conduct, and I claim: 'I am pure in
ethical conduct. My ethical conduct is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My
disciples don't cover up my conduct, and I don't expect them to. I have
pure livelihood, and I claim: 'I am pure in livelihood. My livelihood is
pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my livelihood,
and I don't expect them to. I have pure teaching, and I claim: 'I am
pure in teaching. My teaching is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My
disciples don't cover up my teaching, and I don't expect them to. I have
pure answers, and I claim: 'I am pure in how I answer. My answers are
pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my answers, and
I don't expect them to. I have pure knowledge and vision, and I claim:
'I am pure in knowledge and vision. My knowledge and vision are pure,
bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my knowledge and
vision, and I don't expect them to."

</article>

[]{#an5-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Third Fifty {#an5-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an5-tatiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Living Comfortably {#an5-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an5-phasuviharavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.101">

#### [AN 5.101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assurance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five qualities make a trainee assured. What five?
It's when a mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and
wise.

A person of faith doesn't have the insecurities of someone who lacks
faith. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An ethical person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is
unethical. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

A learned person doesn't have the insecurities of a person of little
learning. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An energetic person doesn't have the insecurities of a lazy person. So
this quality makes a trainee assured.

A wise person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is witless.
So this quality makes a trainee assured.

These are the five qualities that make a trainee assured."

</article>
<article id="an5.102">

#### [AN 5.102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suspected ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ussaṅkitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be
suspected and distrusted as a 'bad monk' for five reasons.

What five? It's when a monk frequently collects alms from prostitutes,
widows, voluptuous girls, eunuchs, or nuns.

Even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be suspected and
distrusted as a 'bad monk' for these five reasons."

</article>
<article id="an5.103">

#### [AN 5.103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Master Thief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahācorasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a master thief with five factors breaks into houses,
plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway
robbery. What five? A master thief relies on rough ground, on thick
cover, and on powerful individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a master thief rely on rough ground? It's when a master
thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged mountains. That's how
a master thief relies on rough ground.

And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? It's when a master
thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a blind spot, or a large
forest grove. That's how a master thief relies on thick cover.

And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
master thief relies on rulers or their ministers. They think: 'If anyone
accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will speak in my
defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens. That's how a
master thief relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a master thief pay bribes? It's when a master thief is
rich, affluent, and wealthy. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of
anything, I'll settle it with a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief pays bribes.

And how does a master thief act alone? It's when a master thief carries
out robbery all alone. Why is that? So that their secret plans are not
leaked to others. That's how a master thief acts alone.

A master thief with these five factors breaks into houses, plunders
wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery.

In the same way, when a bad mendicant has five qualities, they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What five? A bad
mendicant relies on rough ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on rough ground? It's when a bad
mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's
how a bad mendicant relies on rough ground.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? It's when a bad
mendicant has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist view. That's how
a bad mendicant relies on thick cover.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
bad mendicant relies on rulers or their ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their ministers will
speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a bad mendicant pay bribes? It's when a bad mendicant
receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of anything, I'll settle it with
a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens. That's how a bad mendicant
pays bribes.

And how does a bad mendicant act alone? It's when a bad mendicant dwells
alone in the borderlands. They visit families there to acquire material
things. That's how a bad mendicant acts alone.

When a bad mendicant has these five qualities, they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness."

</article>
<article id="an5.104">

#### [AN 5.104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Exquisite Ascetic of Ascetics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasukhumālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

What five?

It's when a mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to
accept---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---rarely using them without invitation.

When living with other spiritual practitioners, they usually treat them
agreeably by way of body, speech, and mind, and rarely disagreeably. And
they usually present them with agreeable things, rarely with
disagreeable ones.

They're healthy, so the various unpleasant feelings---stemming from
disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their conjunction; or caused by
change in weather, by not taking care of themselves, by overexertion, or
as the result of past deeds---usually don't come up.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me. For I usually use only what I've been invited to accept. When
living with other spiritual practitioners, I usually treat them
agreeably. And I usually present them with agreeable things. I'm
healthy. I get the four absorptions when I want, without trouble or
difficulty. And I've realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. So if anyone should be rightly called an
exquisite ascetic of ascetics, it's me."

</article>
<article id="an5.105">

#### [AN 5.105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living Comfortably ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Phāsuvihārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?

It's when a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in
private.

They live according to the precepts shared with their spiritual
companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering.

These are the five ways of living comfortably."

</article>
<article id="an5.106">

#### [AN 5.106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, how could a mendicant live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own ethical conduct, but
they don't urge others to be ethical. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. That's how a mendicant could
live comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that belong to
the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That's
how a mendicant could live comfortably while staying in a monastic
community."

"But sir, might there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that belong to
the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. And
they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community.

And I say that there is no better or finer way of living comfortably
than this."

</article>
<article id="an5.107">

#### [AN 5.107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.108">

#### [AN 5.108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An adept ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when they have the entire spectrum of the adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom.
A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.109">

#### [AN 5.109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [All Four Quarters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cātuddisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is at ease in any quarter.
What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is at ease in any quarter."

</article>
<article id="an5.110">

#### [AN 5.110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wilderness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Araññasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they're ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They live with energy roused up. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

When a mendicant has these five qualities they're ready to frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

</article>

[]{#an5-andhakavindavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter at Andhakavinda {#an5-andhakavindavagga.xhtml_an5-andhakavindavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.111">

#### [AN 5.111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Visiting Families ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kulūpakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities who visits families is
unlikable and unlovable, not respected or admired. What five? They act
as though they\'re close to people they hardly know. They give away
things they don't own. They over-associate with close friends. They
whisper in the ear. And they ask for too much. A mendicant with these
five qualities who visits families is unlikable and unlovable, not
respected or admired.

A mendicant with five qualities who visits families is dear and beloved,
respected and admired. What five? They don't act as though they\'re
close to people they hardly know. They don't give away things they don't
own. They don't over-associate with close friends. They don't whisper in
the ear. And they don't ask for too much. A mendicant with these five
qualities who visits families is dear and beloved, respected and
admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.112">

#### [AN 5.112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Ascetic to Follow Behind on Almsround ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pacchāsamaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you shouldn't take an ascetic with five qualities to follow
behind on almsround. What five? They walk too far away or too close
behind. They don't take your bowl when it's full. They don't warn you
when your speech is bordering on an offense. They keep on interrupting
while you're speaking. And they're witless, dull, and stupid. You
shouldn't take an ascetic with these five qualities to follow behind on
almsround.

You should take an ascetic with five qualities to follow behind on
almsround. What five? They don't walk too far away or too close behind.
They take your bowl when it is full. They warn you when your speech is
bordering on an offense. They don't interrupt while you're speaking. And
they're wise, bright, and clever. You should take an ascetic with these
five qualities to follow behind on almsround."

</article>
<article id="an5.113">

#### [AN 5.113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Right Immersion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammāsamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five qualities can't enter and remain
in right immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these
five qualities can't enter and remain in right immersion.

A mendicant who has five qualities can enter and remain in right
immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these five qualities
can enter and remain in right immersion."

</article>
<article id="an5.114">

#### [AN 5.114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Andhakavinda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Andhakavindasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at
Andhakavinda. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly
come to this teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and
established in five things. What five?

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in restraint in
the monastic code: 'Reverends, please be ethical. Live restrained in the
monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable
places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you've
undertaken.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in sense
restraint: 'Reverends, please live with sense doors guarded, mindfully
alert and on guard, with protected mind, having a heart protected by
mindfulness.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in limiting their
speech: 'Reverends, please speak little. Put a limit on your speech.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in retreat:
'Reverends, please live in the wilderness. Frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in right
perspective: 'Reverends, please hold right view and have right
perspective.'

Those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this
teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and established
in these five things."

</article>
<article id="an5.115">

#### [AN 5.115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stingy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Maccharinīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
She is stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? She is not
stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, or the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.116">

#### [AN 5.116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Praise ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vaṇṇanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She arouses faith
in things that are dubious, and doesn't arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She doesn't arouse faith in
things that are dubious, and does arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.117">

#### [AN 5.117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Jealous ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Issukinīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She is jealous,
stingy, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She is not jealous, or stingy,
and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.118">

#### [AN 5.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Having Wrong View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchādiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong view
and wrong thought, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right view and right
thought, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.119">

#### [AN 5.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wrong Speech ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchāvācāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
speech and wrong action, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right speech and right
action, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.120">

#### [AN 5.120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wrong Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchāvāyāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
effort and wrong mindfulness, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun
with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right effort and right
mindfulness, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an5-gilanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Sick {#an5-gilanavagga.xhtml_an5-gilanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.121">

#### [AN 5.121]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sick ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gilānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha
came out of retreat and went to the infirmary, where he saw a certain
mendicant who was weak and sick. He sat down on the seat spread out, and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if a weak and sick mendicant does not neglect five things,
it can be expected that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

What five? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the
body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction
with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and
has well established the perception of their own death. If a weak and
sick mendicant does not neglect these five things, it can be expected
that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

</article>
<article id="an5.122">

#### [AN 5.122]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness Well Established ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Satisūpaṭṭhitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five? It's when a mendicant has well established mindfulness inside
themselves in order to understand the arising and passing away of
phenomena, meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
and observes the impermanence of all conditions. Any monk or nun who
develops and cultivates these five qualities can expect one of two
results: enlightenment in the present life, or if there's something left
over, non-return."

</article>
<article id="an5.123">

#### [AN 5.123]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Carer (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaupaṭṭhākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a patient with five qualities is hard to care for. What
five? They do what is unsuitable. They don't know moderation in what is
suitable. They don't take their medicine. Though their carer wants
what's best for them, they don't accurately report their symptoms by
saying when they're getting worse, getting better, or staying the same.
And they cannot endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities
is hard to care for.

A patient with five qualities is easy to care for. What five? They do
what is suitable. They know moderation in what is suitable. They take
their medicine. Because their carer wants what's best for them, they
accurately report their symptoms by saying when they're getting worse,
getting better, or staying the same. And they can endure physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities is easy to care
for."

</article>
<article id="an5.124">

#### [AN 5.124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Carer (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaupaṭṭhākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a carer with five qualities is not competent to care for a
patient. What five? They're unable to prepare medicine. They don't know
what is suitable and unsuitable, so they supply what is unsuitable and
remove what is suitable. They care for the sick for the sake of material
benefits, not out of love. They're disgusted to remove feces, urine,
vomit, or spit. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire up, and
inspire the patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with
these five qualities is not competent to care for a patient.

A carer with five qualities is competent to care for a patient. What
five? They're able to prepare medicine. They know what is suitable and
unsuitable, so they remove what is unsuitable and supply what is
suitable. They care for the sick out of love, not for the sake of
material benefits. They're not disgusted to remove feces, urine, vomit,
or spit. They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the
patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with these five
qualities is competent to care for a patient."

</article>
<article id="an5.125">

#### [AN 5.125]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Longevity (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaanāyussāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, activity at unsuitable times, and unchastity.
These are the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
activity at suitable times, and celibacy. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

</article>
<article id="an5.126">

#### [AN 5.126]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Longevity (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaanāyussāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, unethical behavior, and bad friends. These are
the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
ethical conduct, and good friends. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

</article>
<article id="an5.127">

#### [AN 5.127]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living Apart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vapakāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is not fit to live apart
from a Saṅgha community. What five? It's when a mendicant is not content
with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. And they have a lot of sensual thoughts. A mendicant with
these five qualities is not fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community.

A mendicant with five qualities is fit to live apart from a Saṅgha
community. What five? It's when a mendicant is content with any kind of
robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And
they think a lot about renunciation. A mendicant with these five
qualities is fit to live apart from a Saṅgha community."

</article>
<article id="an5.128">

#### [AN 5.128]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Ascetic's Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasukhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering for an ascetic.
What five? It's when a mendicant is not content with any kind of robe,
almsfood, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they
lead the spiritual life dissatisfied. These are five kinds of suffering
for an ascetic.

There are these five kinds of happiness for an ascetic. What five? It's
when a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging,
and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they lead the spiritual
life satisfied. These are five kinds of happiness for an ascetic."

</article>
<article id="an5.129">

#### [AN 5.129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fatal Wounds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parikuppasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five fatal wounds lead to a place of loss, to hell.
What five? Murdering your mother or father or a perfected one;
maliciously shedding the blood of a Realized One; and causing a schism
in the Saṅgha. These five fatal wounds lead to a place of loss, to
hell."

</article>
<article id="an5.130">

#### [AN 5.130]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Loss ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byasanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five losses. What five? Loss of relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of loss of
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics or view that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five losses.

There are these five endowments. What five? Endowment with relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of endowment with
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It
is because of endowment with ethics or view that sentient beings, when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. These are the five endowments."

</article>

[]{#an5-rajavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Kings {#an5-rajavagga.xhtml_an5-rajavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.131">

#### [AN 5.131]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wielding Power (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamacakkānuvattanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch wields
power only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined
by any human enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch knows what is right, knows principle,
knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. A
wheel-turning monarch who possesses these five factors wields power only
in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities a Realized One, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma
only in a principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.

What five? A Realized One knows what is right, knows principle, knows
moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. Possessing
these five qualities a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a principled
manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.132">

#### [AN 5.132]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wielding Power (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyacakkānuvattanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch's eldest
son continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in a
principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son knows what is right,
knows principle, knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the
assembly. A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son who possesses these five
factors continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in
a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities Sāriputta rightly keeps
rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One. And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.

What five? Sāriputta knows what is right, knows principle, knows
moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. Possessing
these five qualities Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel
of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One. And that wheel
cannot be turned back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā
or by anyone in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.133">

#### [AN 5.133]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Principled King ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammarājāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king,
does not wield power without having their own king."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But who is
the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and principled king?"

"It is principle, monk," said the Buddha.

"Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for
his court, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and
authority.

He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals,
troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics
and brahmins, beasts and birds. When he has done this, he wields power
only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any
human enemy.

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the monks, relying only on principle---honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag,
banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily action should be cultivated.
This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated. This kind of verbal
action should be cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be
cultivated. This kind of mental action should be cultivated. This kind
of mental action should not be cultivated. This kind of livelihood
should be cultivated. This kind of livelihood should not be cultivated.
This kind of village or town should be cultivated. This kind of village
or town should not be cultivated.'

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the nuns ... laymen ... laywomen, relying only on
principle---honoring, respecting, and venerating principle, having
principle as his flag, banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily
action should be cultivated. This kind of bodily action should not be
cultivated. This kind of verbal action should be cultivated. This kind
of verbal action should not be cultivated. This kind of mental action
should be cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be
cultivated. This kind of livelihood should be cultivated. This kind of
livelihood should not be cultivated. This kind of village or town should
be cultivated. This kind of village or town should not be cultivated.'

When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
provided just protection and security for the monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a
principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic
or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.134">

#### [AN 5.134]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Whatever Region ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yassaṁdisaṁsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, with five factors an anointed aristocratic king lives in
his own realm, no matter what region he lives in.

What five?

An anointed aristocratic king is well born on both his mother's and
father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is rich, affluent, and wealthy, with a full treasury and storehouses.

He is powerful, having an army of four divisions that is obedient and
carries out instructions.

He has a counselor who is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to
think issues through as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

These four things bring his fame to fruition.

With these five qualities, including fame, an anointed aristocratic king
lives in his own realm, no matter what direction he lives in. Why is
that? Because that is how it is for victors.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities lives with mind freed,
no matter what region they live in. What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
This is like the anointed aristocratic king's impeccable birth.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is like the anointed aristocratic
king being rich, affluent, and wealthy, with full treasury and
storehouses.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is
like the anointed aristocratic king having power.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This
is like the anointed aristocratic king having a counselor.

These four qualities bring their freedom to fruition.

With these five qualities, including freedom, they live in their own
realm, no matter what region they live in. Why is that? Because that is
how it is for those whose mind is free."

</article>
<article id="an5.135">

#### [AN 5.135]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Aspiration (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapatthanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to kingship. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the people of town and country.

He is trained and skilled in the arts of anointed aristocratic kings,
such as elephant riding, horse riding, driving a chariot, archery, and
swordsmanship.

He thinks: 'I'm well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. Why shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to my parents. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to the people of town and country. Why
shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm trained and skilled in the arts of
anointed aristocratic kings, such as elephant riding, horse riding,
driving a chariot, archery, and swordsmanship. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

They're not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the
Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I am a person of faith; I have faith in the Realized One's
awakening ... Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm rarely
ill or unwell. My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. Why shouldn't I aspire to
end the defilements? I'm not devious or deceitful. I reveal myself
honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions. Why shouldn't
I aspire to end the defilements? I live with energy roused up for giving
up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. I'm strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm
wise. I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?'

A mendicant with these five qualities aspires to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an5.136">

#### [AN 5.136]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Aspiration (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapatthanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to become a viceroy. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the armed forces.

He is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through
as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

He thinks: 'I'm well born ... attractive ... dear and beloved to my
parents ... dear and beloved to the armed forces ... I'm astute,
competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through as they bear
upon the past, future, and present. Why shouldn't I aspire to become a
viceroy?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to become a viceroy.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I'm ethical ... learned ... mindful ... energetic ... wise.
I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?' A mendicant with these five
qualities aspires to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an5.137">

#### [AN 5.137]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Little Sleep ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appaṁsupatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five sleep little at night, staying mostly awake.
What five? A woman longing for a man. A man longing for a woman. A thief
longing for their loot. A king busy with his duties. A mendicant longing
for freedom from the yoke. These five sleep little at night, staying
mostly awake."

</article>
<article id="an5.138">

#### [AN 5.138]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eating Food ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhattādakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors eats food, takes up
space, drops dung, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a
royal bull elephant. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A royal bull
elephant with these five factors eats food, takes up space, drops dung,
and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a royal bull elephant.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities eats food, takes up
space, tramples beds and chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still
considered to be a mendicant. What five? It's when a mendicant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant with
these five qualities eats food, takes up space, tramples beds and
chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a mendicant."

</article>
<article id="an5.139">

#### [AN 5.139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cannot Endure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akkhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is not worthy of a
king, not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of
kingship. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sights? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sight
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry. It
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can't endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sounds? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sound
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or
the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure smells? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it smells
the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree royal bull
elephants. It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's
how a royal bull elephant can't endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure tastes? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it misses
a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five meals.
It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a
royal bull elephant can't endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure touches? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when struck by
a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is not worthy of a king,
not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is not worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy
of a religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and
is not the supreme field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a
mendicant can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sights? It's when a
mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is aroused by a desirable
sight, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sounds? It's when a
mendicant, hearing a sound with their ears, is aroused by a desirable
sound, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure smells? It's when a
mendicant, smelling an odor with their nose, is aroused by a desirable
smell, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure tastes? It's when a
mendicant, tasting a flavor with their tongue, is aroused by desirable
tastes, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is aroused by a desirable
touch, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is not worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy of a
religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is
not the supreme field of merit for the world.

A royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What five? It's
when a royal bull elephant can endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sights? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder at the
sight of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of
infantry. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sounds? It's when a
royal bull elephant does not falter or founder at the sound of a
division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or the
thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It stays firm,
and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant can endure
sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure smells? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
smells the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree
royal bull elephants. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how
a royal bull elephant can endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure tastes? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
misses a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five
meals. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure touches? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when
struck by a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows.
It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant
can endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a mendicant can
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sights? It's when a mendicant,
seeing a sight with their eyes, is not aroused by a desirable sight, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sounds? It's when a mendicant,
hearing a sound with their ears, is not aroused by desirable sounds, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure smells? It's when a mendicant,
smelling an odor with their nose, is not aroused by a desirable smell,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure tastes? It's when a mendicant,
tasting a flavor with their tongue, is not aroused by desirable tastes,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is not aroused by a
desirable touch, so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant
can endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.140">

#### [AN 5.140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Listener ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sotasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
five? A royal bull elephant listens, destroys, protects, endures, and
goes fast.

And how does a royal bull elephant listen? It's when a royal bull
elephant pays attention, applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly,
and actively listens to whatever task the elephant trainer has it do,
whether or not it has done it before. That's how a royal bull elephant
listens.

And how does a royal bull elephant destroy? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle destroys elephants with their riders, horses with
their riders, chariots and charioteers, and foot soldiers. That's how a
royal bull elephant destroys.

And how does a royal bull elephant protect? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle protects its fore-quarters and hind-quarters, its
fore-feet and hind-feet, and its head, ears, tusks, trunk, tail, and
rider. That's how a royal bull elephant protects.

And how does a royal bull elephant endure? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and
axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and
cymbals. That's how a royal bull elephant endures.

And how does a royal bull elephant go fast? It's when a royal bull
elephant swiftly goes in whatever direction the elephant trainer sends
it, whether or not it has been there before. That's how a royal bull
elephant goes fast.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? A mendicant listens, destroys,
protects, endures, and goes fast.

And how does a mendicant listen? It's when a mendicant pays attention,
applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens when
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One is being taught.
That's how a mendicant listens.

And how does a mendicant destroy? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's how a
mendicant destroys.

And how does a mendicant protect? When a mendicant sees a sight with the
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
restraint over it. Hearing a sound with the ears ... Smelling an odor
with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with the tongue ... Feeling a touch
with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, they don't get caught
up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. That's
how a mendicant protects.

And how does a mendicant endure? It's when a mendicant endures cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and puts up with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. That's how a mendicant endures.

And how does a mendicant go fast? It's when a mendicant swiftly goes in
the direction they've never gone before in all this long time; that is,
the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. That's how a
mendicant goes fast.

A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

</article>

[]{#an5-tikandakivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter at Tikaṇḍakī {#an5-tikandakivagga.xhtml_an5-tikandakivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.141">

#### [AN 5.141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Scorn ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avajānātisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five? One
gives then scorns, one lives together then scorns, one is gullible for
gossip, one is impulsive, and one is dull and stupid.

And how does a person give then scorn? It's when a person gives someone
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. They
think: 'I give; this one receives.' They give to that person, then they
scorn them. That's how a person gives then scorns.

And how does a person live together then scorn? It's when a person lives
with someone else for two or three years. They live together with that
person, then they scorn them. That's how a person live together then
scorns.

And how is a person gullible for gossip? It's when they're very quick to
believe what a certain person says in praise or criticism of another.
That's how a person is gullible for gossip.

And how is a person impulsive? It's when a certain person is fickle in
faith, devotion, fondness, and confidence. That's how a person is
impulsive.

And how is a person dull and stupid? It's when they don't know the
difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful,
blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side
of dark and bright. That's how a person is dull and stupid.

These are the five people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.142">

#### [AN 5.142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Transgression ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ārabhatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five?

One person transgresses and regrets it. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad,
unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

One person transgresses and doesn't regret it. And they don't understand
...

One person doesn't transgress yet still feels regret. And they don't
understand ...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. But they don't understand
...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. And they do understand
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

Take the case of the person who transgresses and regrets it. And they
don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.
They should be told: 'Venerable, the defilements born of transgression
are found in you, and the defilements born of regret grow. You would do
well to give up the defilements born of transgression and get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who transgresses and doesn't regret it. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are found in you, but the defilements
born of regret don't grow. You would do well to give up the defilements
born of transgression, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In this way
you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who doesn't transgress yet feels regret. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, yet the
defilements born of regret grow. You would do well to get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who neither transgresses nor regrets. But
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, and the
defilements born of regret don't grow. You would do well to develop the
mind and wisdom. In this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

And so, mendicants, when these four people are advised and instructed by
comparison with the fifth person, they gradually attain the ending of
defilements."

</article>
<article id="an5.143">

#### [AN 5.143]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Sārandada ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārandadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were sitting together at
the Sārandada shrine, and this discussion came up among them, "The
appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What five? The
elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the
woman-treasure, and the householder-treasure. The appearance of these
five treasures is rare in the world."

Then those Licchavis sent a man out on to the road, saying, "Mister,
please tell us when you see the Buddha."

That man saw the Buddha coming off in the distance. He went to the
Licchavis and said, "Sirs, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha is coming. Please go at your convenience."

Then those Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, "Please go to the Sārandada shrine, out of sympathy."
The Buddha consented with silence.

Then the Buddha went up to the Sārandada shrine, where he sat on the
seat spread out, and said to the Licchavis, "Licchavis, what were you
sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were
sitting together: 'The appearance of five treasures is rare in the
world. ...'"

"You Licchavis are so fixated on sensual pleasures, that's the only
discussion that came up! Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is
rare in the world. What five?

The appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha.

A teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One.

A person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One.

A person who practices in line with the teaching.

A person who is grateful and thankful.

The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.144">

#### [AN 5.144]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Tikaṇḍakī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tikaṇḍakīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in Tikaṇḍakī Wood. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

1.  "Mendicants, a mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time
    perceiving the following: the repulsive in the unrepulsive,
2.  the unrepulsive in the repulsive,
3.  the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, and
4.  the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.
5.  A mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time staying
    equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the
    unrepulsive.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for things that arouse
greed.' A mendicant should meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive for this reason.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for things that provoke
hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
both the unrepulsive and the repulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for
things that arouse greed. May hate not arise in me for things that
provoke hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for
things that provoke hate. May greed not arise in me for things that
arouse greed.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May no
greed for things that arouse greed, hate for things that provoke hate,
or delusion for things that promote delusion arise in me in any way at
all.' For this reason a mendicant should meditate staying equanimous,
mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive."

</article>
<article id="an5.145">

#### [AN 5.145]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hell ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nirayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie,
and use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Someone with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with five qualities is raised up to heaven What five? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or use
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Someone with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.146">

#### [AN 5.146]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Friend ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has
five qualities. What five? They start up work projects. They take up
disciplinary issues. They conflict with leading mendicants. They like
long and aimless wandering. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire
up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma talk. Mendicants,
you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities.

You should associate with a mendicant friend who has five qualities.
What five? They don't start up work projects. They don't take up
disciplinary issues. They don't conflict with leading mendicants. They
don't like long and aimless wandering. They're able to educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma
talk. You should associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an5.147">

#### [AN 5.147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gifts of an Untrue Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asappurisadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five gifts of an untrue person. What five?
They give carelessly. They give thoughtlessly. They don't give with
their own hand. They give the dregs. They give without consideration for
consequences. These are the five gifts of an untrue person.

There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give
carefully. They give thoughtfully. They give with their own hand. They
don't give the dregs. They give with consideration for consequences.
These are the five gifts of a true person."

</article>
<article id="an5.148">

#### [AN 5.148]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gifts of a True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give a
gift out of faith. They give a gift carefully. They give a gift at the
right time. They give a gift with no strings attached. They give a gift
without hurting themselves or others.

Having given a gift out of faith, in whatever place the result of that
gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And they're
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

Having given a gift carefully, in whatever place the result of that gift
manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And their children,
wives, bondservants, servants, and workers want to listen. They actively
listen and try to understand.

Having given a gift at the right time, in whatever place the result of
that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And when
the time is right, they get all that they need.

Having given a gift with no strings attached, in whatever place the
result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy.
And their mind tends to enjoy the five refined kinds of sensual
stimulation.

Having given a gift without hurting themselves or others, in whatever
place the result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and
wealthy. And no damage comes to their property from anywhere, whether
fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved heirs.

These are the five gifts of a true person."

</article>
<article id="an5.149">

#### [AN 5.149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Temporarily Free (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasamayavimuttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company.
And they don't review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and
company. And they review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily
free."

</article>
<article id="an5.150">

#### [AN 5.150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Temporarily Free (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasamayavimuttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, and sleep. They
don't guard the sense doors and they eat too much. These five things
lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and
company. They guard the sense doors and they have moderation in eating.
These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free."

</article>

[]{#an5-catutthapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fourth Fifty {#an5-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an5-catutthapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on the True Teaching {#an5-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an5-saddhammavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.151">

#### [AN 5.151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Surety in the Right Way (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasammattaniyāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They listen with scattered and disunified mind. They apply
the mind irrationally. Someone with these five qualities is unable to
enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when
listening to the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They listen
with unscattered and unified mind. They apply the mind rationally.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.152">

#### [AN 5.152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Surety in the Right Way (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasammattaniyāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They're witless, dull, and stupid. They think they know what
they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter
the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to
the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They're wise,
bright, and clever. They don't think they know what they don't know.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.153">

#### [AN 5.153]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Surety in the Right Way (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasammattaniyāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They listen to the teaching bent only on putting it
down. They listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind.
They're antagonistic to the teacher, planning to attack them. They're
witless, dull, and stupid. And they think they know what they don't
know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't listen to the teaching bent only on putting it down. They
don't listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They're
not antagonistic to the teacher, and not planning to attack them.
They're wise, bright, and clever. And they don't think they know what
they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the
sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.154">

#### [AN 5.154]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Decline of the True Teaching (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaddhammasammosasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants don't carefully
listen to the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They don't
carefully examine the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they
don't carefully practice in line with the meaning and the teaching
they've understood. These five things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants carefully listen to
the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They carefully examine
the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they carefully practice
in line with the meaning and the teaching they've understood. These five
things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.155">

#### [AN 5.155]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Decline of the True Teaching (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaddhammasammosasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants don't memorize the teaching---statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends,
stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the
first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants don't explain the teaching in detail to
others as they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't make others recite the teaching in
detail as they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't think about and consider the teaching
in their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize the teaching---statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the first thing
that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants explain the teaching in detail to others as
they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants make others recite the teaching in detail as
they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants think about and consider the teaching in
their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.156">

#### [AN 5.156]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Decline of the True Teaching (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasaddhammasammosasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned
incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. This is the first
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that
make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take
instruction respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---don't carefully make others recite the discourses. When they
pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to
preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in
backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are indulgent
and slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, there's a schism in the Saṅgha. When the Saṅgha is split,
they abuse, insult, block, and reject each other. This doesn't inspire
confidence in those without it, and it causes some with confidence to
change their minds. This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline
and disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when the mendicants memorize
discourses that have been learned correctly, with well placed words and
phrases. When the words and phrases are well organized, the meaning is
correctly interpreted. This is the first thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that
make them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---carefully make others recite the discourses. When they pass
away, the discourses aren't cut off at the root, and they have someone
to preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent and slack, leaders
in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They rouse energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each
other, without quarreling, with one recitation. When the Saṅgha is in
harmony, they don't abuse, insult, block, or reject each other. This
inspires confidence in those without it, and increases confidence in
those who have it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.157">

#### [AN 5.157]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inappropriate Talk ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkathāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is inappropriate to speak to five kinds of person by
comparing that person with someone else. What five?

It's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning. It's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity. It's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith?
When an unfaithful person is spoken to about faith they lose their
temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying
annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that faith in
themselves, they don't get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics?
When an unethical person is spoken to about ethics they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that ethical conduct in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about
learning? When an unlearned person is spoken to about learning they lose
their temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that learning in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity?
When a stingy person is spoken to about generosity they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that generosity in themselves, they
don't get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom?
When a witless person is spoken to about wisdom they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

It is inappropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else.

It is appropriate to speak to five kinds of person by comparing that
person with someone else. What five?

It's appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith. It's
appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct. It's
appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning. It's appropriate
to talk to a generous person about generosity. It's appropriate to talk
to a wise person about wisdom.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith? When
a faithful person is spoken to about faith they don't lose their temper,
they don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that faith in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's why it's appropriate
to talk to a faithful person about faith.

And why is it appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct? When an ethical person is spoken to about ethical conduct they
don't lose their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that ethical conduct in
themselves, they get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings.
That's why it's appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning?
When a learned person is spoken to about learning they don't lose their
temper ... Why is that? Seeing that learning in themselves, they get the
rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's appropriate to
talk to a learned person about learning.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity?
When a generous person is spoken to about generosity they don't lose
their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that generosity in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom? When a
wise person is spoken to about wisdom they don't lose their temper, they
don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom.

It is appropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else."

</article>
<article id="an5.158">

#### [AN 5.158]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Timidity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is overcome by timidity.
What five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, unethical, with little
learning, lazy, and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is
overcome by timidity.

A mendicant with five qualities is self-assured. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and wise. A
mendicant with these five qualities is self-assured."

</article>
<article id="an5.159">

#### [AN 5.159]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Udāyī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udāyīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Now, at that time Venerable Udāyī was
sitting teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople.
Seeing this, Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Udāyī is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a large assembly
of laypeople."

"Ānanda, it's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish
five things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others. What five?

You should teach Dhamma to others thinking: 'I will teach step by step.'
...

'I will teach showing my method.' ...

'I will teach out of kindness.' ...

'I will not teach while secretly hoping to profit.' ...

'I will teach without hurting myself or others.'

It's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish these five
things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others."

</article>
<article id="an5.160">

#### [AN 5.160]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard to Get Rid Of ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duppaṭivinodayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five things are hard to get rid of once they've
arisen. What five? Greed, hate, delusion, the feeling of being inspired
to speak out, and thoughts of traveling. These five things are hard to
get rid of once they've arisen."

</article>

[]{#an5-aghatavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Resentment {#an5-aghatavagga.xhtml_an5-aghatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.161">

#### [AN 5.161]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Getting Rid of Resentment (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaāghātapaṭivinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

You should develop love for a person you resent. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

You should develop compassion for a person you resent. ...

You should develop equanimity for a person you resent. ...

You should disregard a person you resent, paying no attention to them.
...

You should focus on the ownership of deeds regarding that person: 'This
venerable is the owner of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are
their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be the heir of
whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.' That's how to get rid of
resentment for that person.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

</article>
<article id="an5.162">

#### [AN 5.162]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Getting Rid of Resentment (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaāghātapaṭivinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body is impure, but
whose behavior by way of speech is pure, you should get rid of
resentment for that kind of person.

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of speech is impure, but
whose behavior by way of body is pure, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, and who doesn't get an openness and clarity of heart from time
to time, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
you should get rid of resentment for that kind of person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body is impure, but whose behavior by way of speech is pure? Suppose
a mendicant wearing rag robes sees a rag by the side of the road. They'd
hold it down with the left foot, spread it out with the right foot, tear
out what was intact, and take it away with them. In the same way, at
that time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of body
and focus on their pure behavior by way of speech. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of speech is impure, but whose behavior by way of body is pure? Suppose
there was a lotus pond covered with moss and aquatic plants. Then along
comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and
parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond, sweep apart the moss and
aquatic plants, drink from their cupped hands, and be on their way. In
the same way, at that time you should ignore that person's impure
behavior by way of speech and focus on their pure behavior by way of
body. That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a little water in a cow's
hoofprint. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They might think: 'This little bit of water
is in a cow's hoofprint. If I drink it with my cupped hands or a bowl,
I'll stir it and disturb it, making it undrinkable. Why don't I get down
on all fours and drink it up like a cow, then be on my way?' So that's
what they do. In the same way, at that time you should ignore that
person's impure behavior by way of speech and body, and focus on the
fact that they get an openness and clarity of heart from time to time.
That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, and who doesn't get an openness and
clarity of heart from time to time? Suppose a person was traveling along
a road, and they were sick, suffering, gravely ill. And it was a long
way to a village, whether ahead or behind. And they didn't have any
suitable food or medicine, or a competent carer, or someone to bring
them within a village. Another person traveling along the road might see
them, and think of them with nothing but sympathy, kindness, and
sympathy: 'Oh, may this person get suitable food or medicine, or a
competent carer, or someone to bring them within a village. Why is that?
So that they don't come to ruin right here.' In the same way, at that
time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of speech
and body, and the fact that they don't get an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time, and think of them with nothing but compassion,
kindness, and sympathy: 'Oh, may this person give up bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind. Why is that? So that, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're not reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.' That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear,
sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful, and shaded by
many trees. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond to bathe
and drink. And after emerging they'd sit or lie down right there in the
shade of the trees.

In the same way, at that time you should focus on that person's pure
behavior by way of body and speech, and on the fact that they get an
openness and clarity of heart from time to time. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person. Relying on a person who is impressive all
around, the mind becomes confident.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

</article>
<article id="an5.163">

#### [AN 5.163]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Discussions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sākacchasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

</article>
<article id="an5.164">

#### [AN 5.164]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sharing a Way of Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sājīvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

</article>
<article id="an5.165">

#### [AN 5.165]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Asking Questions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañhapucchāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: ... "Whoever asks a
question of another, does so for one or other of these five reasons.
What five? Someone asks a question of another from stupidity and folly.
Or they ask from corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or they
ask in order to disparage. Or they ask wanting to understand. Or they
ask with the thought, 'If they correctly answer the question I ask it's
good. If not, I'll correctly answer it for them.' Whoever asks a
question of another, does so for one or other of these five reasons. As
for myself, I ask with the thought, 'If they correctly answer the
question I ask it's good. If not, I'll correctly answer it for them.'"

</article>
<article id="an5.166">

#### [AN 5.166]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cessation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nirodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, then, surpassing the company of gods
that consume solid food, they're reborn in a certain host of mind-made
gods. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "This is not possible,
Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not possible, Reverend
Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Venerable Udāyī disagrees with me
three times, and not one mendicant agrees with me. Why don't I go to see
the Buddha?"

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. There is such a possibility. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Udāyī said to him, "This is not possible, Reverend
Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not possible, Reverend
Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Even in front of the Buddha Venerable
Udāyī disagrees with me three times, and not one mendicant agrees with
me. I'd better stay silent." Then Sāriputta fell silent.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Udāyī, "But Udāyī, do you believe in a
mind-made body?"

"For those gods, sir, who are formless, made of perception."

"Udāyī, what has an incompetent fool like you got to say? How on earth
could you imagine you've got something worth saying!"

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda! How can you just
watch while a senior mendicant is being harassed? Don't you have any
compassion for a senior mendicant who is being harassed?"

Then the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then, not long after the Buddha had left, Venerable Ānanda went to
Venerable Upavāna and said to him, "Reverend Upavāna, they've been
harassing other senior mendicants, but I didn't question them. I
wouldn't be surprised if the Buddha brings this up when he comes out of
retreat later this afternoon. He might even call upon Venerable Upavāna
himself. And right now I feel timid."

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out, and said to
Upavāna, "Upavāna, how many qualities should a senior mendicant have to
be dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and
admired?"

"Sir, a senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice
that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

"Good, good, Upavāna! A senior mendicant with these five qualities is
dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired.
If these five qualities are not found in a senior mendicant, why would
their spiritual companions honor, respect, revere, or venerate them?
Because of their broken teeth, gray hair, and wrinkled skin? But since
these five qualities are found in a senior mendicant, their spiritual
companions honor, respect, revere, or venerate them."

</article>
<article id="an5.167">

#### [AN 5.167]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accusation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Codanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, a mendicant who
wants to accuse another should first establish five things in
themselves.

What five? I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong time. I will
speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not harshly. I will
speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak lovingly, not from
secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first
establish these five things in themselves.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the wrong
time, not being disturbed at the right time. They're accused falsely,
not disturbed truthfully. They're accused harshly, not disturbed gently.
They're accused harmfully, not disturbed beneficially. They're accused
with secret hate, not disturbed lovingly.

The mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in five
ways. 'Venerable, you were accused at the wrong time, not at the right
time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You were accused falsely,
not truthfully. ... You were accused harshly, not gently. ... You were
accused harmfully, not beneficially. ... You were accused with secret
hate, not lovingly. There's no need for you to feel remorse.' A
mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes improper accusations should be chastened in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the wrong time, not at the
right time. There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation falsely, not truthfully. ... You made an accusation harshly,
not gently. ... You made an accusation harmfully, not beneficially. ...
You made an accusation with secret hate, not lovingly. There's a reason
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes improper accusations
should be chastened in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant wouldn't think to make a false accusation.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the right
time, not being disturbed at the wrong time. They're accused truthfully,
not disturbed falsely. They're accused gently, not disturbed harshly.
They're accused beneficially, not disturbed harmfully. They're accused
lovingly, not disturbed with secret hate.

The mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in five ways.
'Venerable, you were accused at the right time, not at the wrong time.
There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You were accused truthfully,
not falsely. ... You were accused gently, not harshly. ... You were
accused beneficially, not harmfully. ... You were accused lovingly, not
with secret hate. There's a reason for you to feel remorse.' The
mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes proper accusations should be reassured in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the right time, not at the
wrong time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation truthfully, not falsely. ... You made an accusation gently,
not harshly. ... You made an accusation beneficially, not harmfully. ...
You made an accusation lovingly, not with secret hate. There's no need
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes proper accusations
should be reassured in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant would think to make a true accusation.

A person who is accused should ground themselves in two things: truth
and an even temper. Even if others accuse me---at the right time or the
wrong time, truthfully or falsely, gently or harshly, beneficially or
harmfully, lovingly or with secret hate---I will still ground myself in
two things: truth and an even temper. If I know that that quality is
found in me, I will tell them that it is. If I know that that quality is
not found in me, I will tell them that it is not."

"Even when you speak like this, Sāriputta, there are still some silly
people here who do not respectfully take it up."

"Sir, there are those faithless people who went forth from the lay life
to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood. They're
devious, deceitful, and sneaky. They're restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, and loose-tongued. They do not guard their sense doors or
eat in moderation, and they are not dedicated to wakefulness. They don't
care about the ascetic life, and don't keenly respect the training.
They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting
seclusion, lazy, and lacking energy. They're unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds, witless and
stupid. When I speak to them like this, they don't respectfully take it
up.

Sir, there are those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness out of faith. They're not devious, deceitful, and sneaky.
They're not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued.
They guard their sense doors and eat in moderation, and they are
dedicated to wakefulness. They care about the ascetic life, and keenly
respect the training. They're not indulgent or slack, nor are they
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They're energetic and
determined. They're mindful, with situational awareness, immersion, and
unified minds; wise, not stupid. When I speak to them like this, they do
respectfully take it up."

"Sāriputta, those faithless people who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood ... Leave them
be.

But those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to homelessness out
of faith ... You should speak to them. Sāriputta, you should advise your
spiritual companions! You should instruct your spiritual companions!
Thinking: 'I will draw my spiritual companions away from false teachings
and ground them in true teachings.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an5.168">

#### [AN 5.168]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. In the
same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a
vital condition for right immersion.

When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has
fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is
true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and
vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and
dispassion. When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an5.169">

#### [AN 5.169]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Quick-witted ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khippanisantisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Reverend Sāriputta, how are we to define a mendicant who is
quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings, who learns well,
learns much, and does not forget what they've learned?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied. Venerable Ānanda said this:

"It's when a mendicant is skilled in the meaning, skilled in the
teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in
sequence. That is how to define a mendicant who is quick-witted when it
comes to skillful teachings, who learns well, learns much, and does not
forget what they've learned."

"It's incredible, it's amazing! How well this was said by Venerable
Ānanda! And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who has these
five qualities: 'Reverend Ānanda is skilled in the meaning, skilled in
the teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled
in sequence.'"

</article>
<article id="an5.170">

#### [AN 5.170]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bhaddaji ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaddajisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery. Then Venerable Bhaddaji went up to Venerable Ānanda, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side, and Venerable Ānanda said to him:

"Reverend Bhaddaji, what is the best sight, the best sound, the best
happiness, the best perception, and the best form of existence?"

"Reverend, there is this Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the
universal seer, the wielder of power. When you see Brahmā, that's the
best sight. There are the gods called 'of streaming radiance', who are
drenched and steeped in pleasure. Every so often they feel inspired to
exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what bliss!' When you hear that, it's the
best sound. There are the gods called 'of universal beauty'. Since
they're truly content, they experience pleasure. This is the best
happiness. There are the gods reborn in the dimension of nothingness.
This is the best perception. There are the gods reborn in the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the best form of
existence."

"So, Venerable Bhaddaji, do you agree with what most people say about
this?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Bhaddaji, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, reverend," Bhaddaji replied. Ānanda said this:

"What you see when the defilements end in the present life is the best
sight. What you hear when the defilements end in the present life is the
best sound. The happiness you feel when the defilements end in the
present life is the best happiness. What you perceive when the
defilements end in the present life is the best perception. The state of
existence in which the defilements end in the present life is the best
form of existence."

</article>

[]{#an5-upasakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Lay Follower {#an5-upasakavagga.xhtml_an5-upasakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.171">

#### [AN 5.171]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Timidity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"A lay follower with five qualities is overcome by timidity. What five?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and
use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay follower with these
five qualities is overcome by timidity.

A lay follower with five qualities is self-assured. What five? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay follower with these
five qualities is self-assured."

</article>
<article id="an5.172">

#### [AN 5.172]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assured ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Visāradasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A lay follower living at home with five qualities is not self-assured.
What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, and use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay follower
living at home with these five qualities is not self-assured.

A lay follower living at home with these five qualities is self-assured.
What five? They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay
follower living at home with these five qualities is self-assured."

</article>
<article id="an5.173">

#### [AN 5.173]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hell ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nirayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a lay follower with five qualities is cast down to hell.
What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, and use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay follower with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A lay follower with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five?
They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie,
or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. A lay follower with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.174">

#### [AN 5.174]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Threats ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Verasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, unless these five dangers and threats are given up, one is
said to be unethical, and is reborn in hell. What five? Killing living
creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and using
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. Unless these five dangers and
threats are given up, one is said to be unethical, and is reborn in
hell.

Once these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be
ethical, and is reborn in heaven. What five? Killing living creatures,
stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and using alcoholic
drinks that cause negligence. Once these five dangers and threats are
given up, one is said to be ethical, and is reborn in heaven.

Anyone who kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in
the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and
sadness. Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no
dangers and threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and
doesn't experience mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is
quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ...

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ...

Anyone who lies ...

Anyone who uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates dangers
and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and
experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from using
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates no dangers and threats
either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience
mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone
who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.

> Take anyone in this world\
> who kills living creatures,\
> speaks falsely, steals,\
> commits adultery,\
> and indulges in drinking\
> alcohol and liquor.
>
> Unless they give up these five threats,\
> they're said to be unethical.\
> When their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell.
>
> A person in the world doesn't kill living creatures,\
> speak falsely,\
> steal,\
> commit adultery,\
> or indulge in drinking\
> alcohol and liquor.
>
> Giving up these five threats,\
> they're said to be ethical.\
> When their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in a good place."

</article>
<article id="an5.175">

#### [AN 5.175]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Corpse-worker ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Caṇḍālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a lay follower with five qualities is a corpse-worker, a
stain, and a reject among lay followers. What five? They're faithless.
They're unethical. They follow boisterous, superstitious rites,
believing in omens rather than deeds. They seek outside of the Buddhist
community for those worthy of religious donations. And they make
offerings there first. A lay follower with these five qualities is a
corpse-worker, a stain, and a reject among lay followers.

A lay follower with five qualities is a gem, a pink lotus, and a white
lotus among lay followers. What five? They're faithful. They're ethical.
They don't practice boisterous, superstitious rites, and believe in
deeds rather than omens. They don't seek outside of the Buddhist
community for those worthy of religious donations. And they don't make
offerings there first. A lay follower with these five qualities is a
gem, a pink lotus, and a white lotus among lay followers."

</article>
<article id="an5.176">

#### [AN 5.176]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rapture ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pītisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, escorted by around five hundred lay
followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to him:

"Householders, you have supplied the mendicant Saṅgha with robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. But you
should not be content with just this much. So you should train like
this: 'How can we, from time to time, enter and dwell in the rapture of
seclusion?' That's how you should train."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha, "It's
incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well said this was by the Buddha:
'Householders, you have supplied the mendicant Saṅgha with robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. But you
should not be content with just this much. So you should train like
this: "How can we, from time to time, enter and dwell in the rapture of
seclusion?" That's how you should train.'

At a time when a noble disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of
seclusion, five things aren't present in him. The pain and sadness
connected with sensual pleasures. The pleasure and happiness connected
with sensual pleasures. The pain and sadness connected with the
unskillful. The pleasure and happiness connected with the unskillful.
The pain and sadness connected with the skillful. At a time when a noble
disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of seclusion, these five
things aren't present in him."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! At a time when a noble disciple enters and
dwells in the rapture of seclusion, five things aren't present in him.
The pain and sadness connected with sensual pleasures. The pleasure and
happiness connected with sensual pleasures. The pain and sadness
connected with the unskillful. The pleasure and happiness connected with
the unskillful. The pain and sadness connected with the skillful. At a
time when a noble disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of
seclusion, these five things aren't present in him."

</article>
<article id="an5.177">

#### [AN 5.177]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Trades ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vaṇijjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a lay follower should not engage in these five trades. What
five? Trade in weapons, living creatures, meat, intoxicants, and
poisons. A lay follower should not engage in these five trades."

</article>
<article id="an5.178">

#### [AN 5.178]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kings ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rājāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up killing living creatures, and the kings have them
arrested for that, and execute, imprison, or banish them, or do what the
case requires?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person has
murdered a man or a woman.' The kings have them arrested for killing,
and execute, imprison, or banish them, or do what the case requires.
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up stealing, and the kings have them arrested for that
...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person took
something from a village or wilderness, with the intention to commit
theft.' The kings have them arrested for stealing ... Have you ever seen
or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up sexual misconduct, and the kings have them arrested for
that ...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person had
sexual relations with women or maidens under someone else's protection.'
The kings have them arrested for that ... Have you ever seen or heard of
such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up lying, and the kings have them arrested for that ...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person has
ruined a householder or householder's child by lying.' The kings have
them arrested for that ... Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, and the kings
have them arrested for that, and execute, imprison, or banish them, or
do what the case requires?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'While under the
influence of alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, this person
murdered a woman or a man. Or they stole something from a village or
wilderness. Or they had sexual relations with women or maidens under
someone else's protection. Or they ruined a householder or householder's
child by lying.' The kings have them arrested for being under the
influence of alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, and execute,
imprison, or banish them, or do what the case requires. Have you ever
seen or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

</article>
<article id="an5.179">

#### [AN 5.179]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Layperson ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gihisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, escorted by around five hundred lay
followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then
the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

"You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed laypeople
whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get four
blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind
when they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained?
It's when a noble disciple doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit
sexual misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.
These are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained.

And what are the four blissful meditations in the present life belonging
to the higher mind that they get when they want, without trouble or
difficulty?

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
This is the first blissful meditation in the present life belonging to
the higher mind, which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified
mind and cleanse the unclean mind.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' This is the second
blissful meditation ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha:
'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good,
direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' This is the third blissful
meditation ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This is the
fourth blissful meditation in the present life belonging to the higher
mind, which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified mind and
cleanse the unclean mind. These are the four blissful meditations in the
present life belonging to the higher mind that they get when they want,
without trouble or difficulty.

You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed laypeople
whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get four
blissful meditations in the present life belonging to the higher mind
when they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

> Seeing the peril in the hells,\
> you should shun bad deeds.\
> Taking up the teaching of the noble ones,\
> an astute person should shun them.
>
> You shouldn't harm living beings,\
> so long as strength is found.\
> Nor should you knowingly speak falsehood,\
> or take what is not given.
>
> Content with your own partners,\
> you should stay away from the partners of others.\
> A man shouldn't drink liquor or wine,\
> as they confuse the mind.
>
> You should recollect the Buddha,\
> and reflect on the teaching.\
> You should develop a harmless mind of welfare,\
> which leads to the realms of gods.
>
> When suitable gifts to give are available\
> to someone who seeks and needs merit,\
> a religious donation is abundant\
> if given first to the peaceful ones.
>
> I will tell of the peaceful ones,\
> Sāriputta, listen to me.\
> Cows may be black or white,\
> red or tawny,
>
> mottled or uniform,\
> or pigeon-colored.\
> But when one is born among them,\
> the bull that's tamed---
>
> a behemoth, powerful,\
> well-paced in pulling forward---\
> they yoke the load just to him,\
> regardless of his color.
>
> So it is for humans,\
> wherever they may be born---\
> among aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,\
> menials, or corpse-workers and scavengers---
>
> but when one is born among them,\
> tamed, true to their vows.\
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious,
>
> they've given up birth and death,\
> and have completed the spiritual journey.\
> With burden put down, detached,\
> they've completed the task `<j>`{=html}and are free of defilements.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> Gone beyond all things,\
> they're quenched by not grasping.\
> In that flawless field,\
> a religious donation is abundant.
>
> Fools who don't understand---\
> stupid, unlearned---\
> give their gifts to those outside,\
> and don't attend the peaceful ones.
>
> But those who do attend the peaceful ones---\
> wise, esteemed as sages---\
> and whose faith in the Holy One\
> has roots planted deep,
>
> they go to the realm of the gods,\
> or are born here in a good family.\
> Gradually those astute ones\
> reach extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an5.180">

#### [AN 5.180]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Gavesī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gavesīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. While traveling along a road
the Buddha saw a large sal grove in a certain spot. He left the road,
went to the sal grove, and plunged deep into it. And at a certain spot
he smiled.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "What is the cause, what is the reason
why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

So Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "What is the cause, what is the
reason why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

"Once upon a time, Ānanda, there was a city in this spot that was
successful and prosperous, populous, full of people. And Kassapa, a
blessed one, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, lived supported
by that city.

He had a lay follower called Gavesī who had not fulfilled all the
precepts. And the five hundred lay followers who were taught and advised
by Gavesī also had not fulfilled all the precepts. Then Gavesī thought:
'I'm the helper, leader, and adviser of these five hundred lay
followers, yet neither I nor they have fulfilled the precepts. We're the
same, I'm in no way better. So let me do better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and said to them:
'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one who has
fulfilled the precepts.' Then those five hundred lay followers thought:
'Master Gavesī is our helper, leader, and adviser, and now he will
fulfill the precepts. Why don't we do the same?' Then those five hundred
lay followers went to Gavesī and said to him: 'From this day forth may
Master Gavesī remember these five hundred lay followers as having
fulfilled the precepts.'

Then Gavesī thought: 'I'm the helper, leader, and adviser of these five
hundred lay followers, and both I and they have fulfilled the precepts.
We're the same, I'm in no way better. So let me do better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and said to them:
'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one who is
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex.' Then those five
hundred lay followers did the same. ...

Then Gavesī thought: 'These five hundred lay followers ... are celibate,
set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. We're the same, I'm in no way
better. So let me do better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and said to them:
'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one who eats in
one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and from food at
the wrong time.' Then those five hundred lay followers did the same. ...

Then Gavesī thought: 'These five hundred lay followers ... eat in one
part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and food at the wrong
time. We're the same, I'm in no way better. So let me do better.'

Then the lay follower Gavesī went up to the blessed one Kassapa, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha and said to him: 'Sir, may I
receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?' And
he received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence.
Not long after his ordination, the mendicant Gavesī, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, realized the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.' And the mendicant Gavesī became one of the perfected.

Then those five hundred lay followers thought: 'Master Gavesī is our
helper, leader, and adviser, He has shaved off his hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Why don't we do the same?' Then those five hundred lay
followers went up to the blessed one Kassapa, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha and said to him: 'Sir, may we receive the going
forth and ordination in the Buddha's presence?' And they did receive the
going forth and ordination in the Buddha's presence.

Then the mendicant Gavesī thought: 'I get the supreme bliss of freedom
whenever I want, without trouble or difficulty. Oh, may these five
hundred mendicants do the same!' Then those five hundred mendicants,
living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the
supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. They lived
having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

They understood: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

And so, Ānanda, those five hundred mendicants headed by Gavesī, trying
to go higher and higher, better and better, realized the supreme bliss
of freedom. So you should train like this: 'Trying to go higher and
higher, better and better, we will realize the supreme bliss of
freedom.' That's how you should train."

</article>

[]{#an5-arannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Wilderness Dwellers {#an5-arannavagga.xhtml_an5-arannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.181">

#### [AN 5.181]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wilderness Dwellers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āraññikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of wilderness dwellers. What
five? A person may be wilderness dweller because of stupidity and folly.
Or because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because
of madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas
and their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake
of contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are
the five kinds of wilderness dwellers. But the person who dwells in the
wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
dwells in the wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

</article>
<article id="an5.182">

#### [AN 5.182]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Robes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cīvarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five wear rag robes. What five? A person may wear rag
robes because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it
is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake of having few wishes ...
These are the five who wear rag robes."

</article>
<article id="an5.183">

#### [AN 5.183]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dwelling at the Root of a Tree ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rukkhamūlikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five who dwell at the root of a tree. What
five? A person may dwell at the root of a tree because of stupidity ...
corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ...
or for the sake of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell at
the root of a tree."

</article>
<article id="an5.184">

#### [AN 5.184]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Charnel Ground Dwellers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sosānikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants,these five dwell in a charnel ground. What five? A person
may dwell in a charnel ground because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes
... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake
of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell in a charnel
ground."

</article>
<article id="an5.185">

#### [AN 5.185]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Open Air Dwellers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abbhokāsikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five dwell in the open air. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.186">

#### [AN 5.186]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Those Who Never Lie Down ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nesajjikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five never lie down. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.187">

#### [AN 5.187]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Those Who Sleep Wherever a Mat is Laid ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yathāsanthatikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five sleep wherever they lay their mat. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.188">

#### [AN 5.188]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Those Who Eat in One Sitting ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ekāsanikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five eat in one sitting per day. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.189">

#### [AN 5.189]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Refusers of Late Food ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khalupacchābhattikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These five refuse to accept food offered after the meal has begun. ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.190">

#### [AN 5.190]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Those Who Eat Only From the Almsbowl ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pattapiṇḍikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five eat only from the almsbowl. What five? A person
may eat only from the almsbowl because of stupidity and folly. Or
because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of
madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas and
their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake of
contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are the
five kinds of people who eat only from the almsbowl. But the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

</article>

[]{#an5-brahmanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Brahmins {#an5-brahmanavagga.xhtml_an5-brahmanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.191">

#### [AN 5.191]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dogs ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited
these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. What five?

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women, not with others.
These days brahmins have sex with both brahmin women and others. But
these days dogs have sex only with female dogs, not with other species.
This is the first ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women in the fertile
phase of the menstrual cycle, not at other times. These days brahmins
have sex with brahmin women both in the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle and at other times. But these days dogs have sex only with female
dogs when they are in heat, not at other times. This is the second
ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but
not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins neither bought nor sold brahmin women. They lived
together because they loved each other and wanted their family line to
continue. These days brahmins both buy and sell brahmin women. They live
together whether they love each other or not and they want their family
line to continue. But these days dogs neither buy nor sell female dogs.
They live together because they're attracted to each other and want
their family line to continue. This is the third ancient tradition of
the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins did not store up money, grain, silver, or gold.
These days brahmins do store up money, grain, silver, and gold. But
these days dogs don't store up money, grain, silver, or gold. This is
the fourth ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among
dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins went looking for almsfood for dinner in the
evening, and for breakfast in the morning. These days brahmins eat as
much as they like until their bellies are full, then take away the
leftovers. But these days dogs go looking for dinner in the evening, and
for breakfast in the morning. This is the fifth ancient tradition of the
brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

These five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins."

</article>
<article id="an5.192">

#### [AN 5.192]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Brahmin Doṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Doṇabrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Doṇa the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Doṇa sat
down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that the ascetic Gotama doesn't bow to old
brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. And this is indeed the case, for Mister Gotama does
not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years
and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their
presence or offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister Gotama."

"Doṇa, do you too claim to be a brahmin?"

"Mister Gotama, if anyone should be rightly called a brahmin, it's me.
For I am well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. I recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. I know them word-by-word, and their grammar. I am well versed
in cosmology and the marks of a great man."

"Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva,
Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and
Bhagu. They were the authors and propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal
was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient times. These days,
brahmins continue to sing and chant it. They continue chanting what was
chanted, reciting what was recited, and teaching what was taught. Those
seers described five kinds of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to
Brahmā, one who is equal to a god, one who toes the line, one who
crosses the line, and the fifth is a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of
these are you, Doṇa?"

"Mister Gotama, we don't know about these five kinds of brahmins. We
just know the word 'brahmin'. Mister Gotama, please teach me this matter
so I can learn about these five brahmins."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Doṇa replied. The Buddha said this:

"Doṇa, how is a brahmin equal to Brahmā?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the boy's spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a fee
for his tutor, but only by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by farming, trade,
raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of the professions,
but solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms bowl. Having offered
the fee to his tutor, he shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in ocher
robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion
... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to
the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. Having developed these four divine meditations, when the body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a divine realm
of Brahmā.

That's how a brahmin is equal to Brahmā.

And how is a brahmin equal to a god?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ... Having offered the fee to his tutor, he seeks a wife, but only
by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by buying or selling, he
only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex only
with a brahmin woman. He does not have sex with a woman from a family of
aristocrats, peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo-workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. Nor does he have sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a pregnant woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a pregnant woman, the boy or girl would be born in
too much filth. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a pregnant
woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a breastfeeding woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a breastfeeding woman, the boy or girl would drink
back the semen. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a
breastfeeding woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex outside the fertile phase of the
menstrual cycle? Because his brahmin wife is not there for sensual
pleasure, fun, and enjoyment, but only for procreation. Having ensured
his progeny through sex, he shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in
ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness.

When he has gone forth, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. Having
developed these four absorptions, when the body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

That's how a brahmin is equal to god.

And how does a brahmin toe the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Not by buying or selling, he only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring
of water. Having ensured his progeny through sex, his child makes him
happy. Because of this attachment he stays in his family property, and
does not go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he doesn't cross
over it. That's why he's called a brahmin who toes the line.

That's how a brahmin toes the line.

And how does a brahmin cross the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he crosses over it.
That's why he's called a brahmin who crosses the line.

That's how a brahmin crosses the line.

And how is a brahmin a brahmin corpse-worker?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the virginal spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a
fee for his tutor by legitimate means and illegitimate means. By
farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of
the professions, not solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms
bowl.

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

He earns a living by any kind of work. The brahmins say to him, 'My good
man, why is it that you claim to be a brahmin, but you earn a living by
any kind of work?'

He says, 'It's like a fire that burns both pure and filthy things, but
doesn't become corrupted by them. In the same way, my good man, if a
brahmin earns a living by any kind of work, he is not corrupted by
that.'

A brahmin is called a brahmin corpse-worker because he earns a living by
any kind of work.

That's how a brahmin is a brahmin corpse-worker.

Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva,
Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and
Bhagu. They were the authors and propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal
was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient times. These days,
brahmins continue to sing and chant it. They continue chanting what was
chanted, reciting what was recited, and teaching what was taught.

Those seers described five kinds of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to
Brahmā, one who is equal to a god, one who toes the line, one who
crosses the line, and the fifth is a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of
these are you, Doṇa?"

"This being so, Mister Gotama, I don't even qualify as a brahmin
corpse-worker.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an5.193">

#### [AN 5.193]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Saṅgārava sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why sometimes even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced? And why is it that sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced?"

"Brahmin, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in
sensual desire and you don't truly understand the escape from sensual
desire that has arisen. At that time you don't truly know or see what is
good for yourself, good for another, or good for both. Even hymns that
are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was mixed with dye
such as red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. Even a person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see
it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was heated by
fire, boiling and bubbling. Even a person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the same way, when
your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of
water overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. Even a person with clear
eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In
the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in restlessness and
remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water
stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. Even a person
with clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or
see it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was cloudy,
murky, and muddy, hidden in the darkness. Even a person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the
same way, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt
and you don't truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At
that time you don't truly know or see what is good for yourself, good
for another, or good for both. Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

There's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual
desire and you truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has
arisen. At that time you truly know and see what is good for yourself,
good for another, and good for both. Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.
Suppose there was a bowl of water that was not mixed with dye such as
red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire
... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ...
Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's not heated
by a fire, boiling and bubbling. A person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way, when
your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in restlessness
and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. A person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it.
In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring
to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's transparent, clear,
and unclouded, brought into the light. A person with clear eyes checking
their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way,
there's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt and
you truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At that time
you truly know and see what is good for yourself, good for another, and
good for both. Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why sometimes even hymns
that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are
not practiced. And this is why sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an5.194">

#### [AN 5.194]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kāraṇapālī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāraṇapālīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time the brahmin Kāraṇapālī was working for the Licchavis.
He saw the brahmin Piṅgiyānī coming off in the distance and said to him,
"So, Piṅgiyānī, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?"

"I'm coming, my good man, from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"What do you think of the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom? Do you
think he's astute?"

"My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom?
You'd really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of
wisdom."

"Mister Piṅgiyānī praises the ascetic Gotama with magnificent praise
indeed."

"Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? He is praised by the praised as
the first among gods and humans."

"But for what reason are you so devoted to the ascetic Gotama?"

"Suppose a person was completely satisfied by the best tasting food.
They wouldn't be attracted to anything that tasted inferior. In the same
way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be,
whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you're not attracted to the doctrines of the various
ascetics and brahmins.

Suppose a person who was weak with hunger was to obtain a honey-cake.
Wherever they taste it, they would enjoy a sweet, delicious flavor. In
the same way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may
be, whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you get a sense of uplift, a confidence of the heart.

Suppose a person were to obtain a piece of sandalwood, whether yellow or
red. Wherever they smelled it---whether at the root, the middle, or the
top---they'd enjoy a delicious fragrance. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you become filled
with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. A good
doctor would cure them on the spot. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you make an end of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean,
with smooth banks, delightful. Then along comes a person struggling in
the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the
lotus pond to bathe and drink. And all their stress, weariness, and heat
exhaustion would die down. In the same way, when you hear Mister
Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then all your stress,
weariness, and exhaustion die down."

When this was said, the brahmin Kāraṇapālī got up from his seat,
arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his
joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment
three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Excellent, Mister Piṅgiyānī! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Piṅgiyānī has made the teaching clear in many ways.
I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Mister Piṅgiyānī remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an5.195">

#### [AN 5.195]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Piṅgiyānī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Piṅgiyānīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were visiting the Buddha.
Some of the Licchavis were in blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned
with blue. And some were similarly colored in yellow, red, or white. But
the Buddha outshone them all in beauty and glory.

Then the brahmin Piṅgīyānī got up from his seat, arranged his robe over
one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, "I
feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to speak, Holy
One!"

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said the Buddha. So the brahmin
Piṅgīyānī extolled the Buddha in his presence with a fitting verse.

> "Like a fragrant pink lotus\
> that blooms in the morning, its fragrance unfaded---\
> see Aṅgīrasa shine,\
> bright as the sun in the sky!"

Then those Licchavis clothed Piṅgiyānī with five hundred upper robes.
And Piṅgiyānī clothed the Buddha with them.

Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis:

"Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What
five? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One. A person who practices in line with the teaching. A person
who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these five treasures is
rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.196">

#### [AN 5.196]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Dreams ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāsupinasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, before his awakening five great dreams appeared to the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was
still not awake but intent on awakening. What five?

This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains, was his
pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His right hand
was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid down in
the southern sea. This is the first great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel and
stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This is the second great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet and
covered his knees. This is the third great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, four birds of different colors came from the four quarters. They
fell at his feet, turning pure white. This is the fourth great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth while
remaining unsoiled. This is the fifth great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Now, as to when, before his awakening, the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha was still not awake but intent on
awakening. This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains,
was his pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His
right hand was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid
down in the southern sea. This was fulfilled when the Buddha awakened to
the perfect awakening. This was the first great dream that appeared to
him while he was still not awakened.

As to when a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel
and stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This was fulfilled when, after
the Buddha had awakened to the noble eightfold path, it was well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans. This was the second great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet
and covered his knees. This was fulfilled when many white-clothed
laypeople went for refuge to him for life. This was the third great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when four birds of different colors came from the four quarters.
They fell at his feet, turning pure white. This was fulfilled when
members of the four classes---aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials---went forth from the lay life to homelessness in the teaching
and training proclaimed by the Realized One and realized supreme
freedom. This was the fourth great dream that appeared to him while he
was still not awakened.

As to when he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth
while remaining unsoiled. This was fulfilled when the Realized One
received robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. And he used them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This was the fifth great dream
that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

Before his awakening these five great dreams appeared to the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was still not
awake but intent on awakening."

</article>
<article id="an5.197">

#### [AN 5.197]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Obstacles to Rain ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles to rain, which the
forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not traverse. What
five?

In the upper atmosphere the fire element flares up, which disperses the
clouds. This is the first obstacle to rain, which the forecasters don't
know, and which their vision does not traverse.

Furthermore, in the upper atmosphere the air element flares up, which
disperses the clouds. This is the second obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, Rāhu, lord of titans, receives water in his hand and tosses
it in the ocean. This is the third obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, the gods of the rain clouds become negligent. This is the
fourth obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, humans become unprincipled. This is the fifth obstacle to
rain, which the forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not
traverse.

These are the five obstacles to rain, which the forecasters don't know,
and which their vision does not traverse."

</article>
<article id="an5.198">

#### [AN 5.198]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Well-Spoken Words ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vācāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, speech that has five factors is well spoken, not poorly
spoken. It's blameless and is not criticized by sensible people. What
five? It is speech that is timely, true, gentle, beneficial, and loving.
Speech with these five factors is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It's
blameless and is not criticized by sensible people."

</article>
<article id="an5.199">

#### [AN 5.199]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Families ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for five reasons. What five?

When they see ethical renunciates coming to their family, the people
bring up confidence in their hearts. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to heaven.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people rise from
their seats, bow down, and offer them a seat. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to a birth in an eminent family.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people get rid of the
stain of stinginess. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to being illustrious.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people share what
they have as best they can. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to great wealth.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people ask questions
and listen to the teachings. At that time the family is practicing a
path leading to great wisdom.

When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for these five reasons."

</article>
<article id="an5.200">

#### [AN 5.200]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements of Escape ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five elements of escape. What five?

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but on that
their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on renunciation, on that their mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. Their mind
is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well
detached from sensual pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and
feverish defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they
don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the escape from
sensual pleasures is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.

Delight in sensual pleasures, ill will, harming, form, and substantial
reality don't linger within them. That's why they're called a mendicant
who is without underlying tendencies, who has cut off craving, untied
the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering. These are the five elements of escape."

</article>

[]{#an5-pancamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fifth Fifty {#an5-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an5-pancamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter with Kimbila {#an5-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an5-kimilavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.201">

#### [AN 5.201]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kimbila ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kimilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimbilā in the Freshwater
Mangrove Wood. Then Venerable Kimbila went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training,
and each other after the final quenching of the Realized One. This is
the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does not last long
after the final quenching of the Realized One."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain
respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, and each other after the final quenching of the Realized One.
This is the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does last
long after the final quenching of the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an5.202">

#### [AN 5.202]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Listening to the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammassavanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five benefits of listening to the teaching.
What five? You learn new things, clarify what you've learned, get over
uncertainty, correct your views, and inspire confidence in your mind.
These are the five benefits of listening to the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an5.203">

#### [AN 5.203]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Thoroughbred ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with five factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

What five? Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. A fine
royal thoroughbred with these five factors is worthy of a king. ... In
the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. A
mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

</article>
<article id="an5.204">

#### [AN 5.204]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? Faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the five powers."

</article>
<article id="an5.205">

#### [AN 5.205]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard-heartedness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetokhilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of hard-heartedness. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual
companions, resentful and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the fifth kind of hard-heartedness. These are the five kinds of
hard-heartedness."

</article>
<article id="an5.206">

#### [AN 5.206]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shackles ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vinibandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind
doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the first shackle of the heart.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one
of the orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or
fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart. These
are the five shackles of the heart."

</article>
<article id="an5.207">

#### [AN 5.207]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Porridge ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yāgusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five benefits of porridge. What five? It
wards off hunger, quenches thirst, settles the wind, cleans the bladder,
and helps digestion. These are the five benefits of porridge."

</article>
<article id="an5.208">

#### [AN 5.208]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Chew Sticks ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dantakaṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of not using chew sticks.
What five? It's not good for your eyes, you get bad breath, your
taste-buds aren't cleaned, bile and phlegm cover your food, and you lose
your appetite. These are the five drawbacks of not using chew sticks.

There are these five benefits of using chew sticks. What five? It's good
for your eyes, you don't get bad breath, your taste-buds are cleaned,
bile and phlegm don't cover your food, and food agrees with you. These
are the five benefits of using chew sticks."

</article>
<article id="an5.209">

#### [AN 5.209]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Sound of Singing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gītassarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in reciting with a drawn-out
singing voice. What five? You relish the sound of your own voice. Others
relish the sound of your voice. Householders complain: 'These ascetics,
followers of the Sakyan, sing just like us!' When you're enjoying the
melody, your immersion breaks up. Those who come after follow your
example. These are the five drawbacks in reciting with a drawn-out
singing voice."

</article>
<article id="an5.210">

#### [AN 5.210]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unmindful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Muṭṭhassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful
and unaware. What five? You sleep badly and wake miserably. You have bad
dreams. The deities don't protect you. And you emit semen. These are the
five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful and unaware.

There are these five benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware. What
five? You sleep at ease and wake happily. You don't have bad dreams. The
deities protect you. And you don't emit semen. These are the five
benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware."

</article>

[]{#an5-akkosakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Abuse {#an5-akkosakavagga.xhtml_an5-akkosakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.211">

#### [AN 5.211]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Abuser ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akkosakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual
companions, speaking ill of the noble ones, can expect these five
drawbacks. What five? They're expelled, cut off, shut out; or they
commit a corrupt offense; or they contract a severe illness. They feel
lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A
mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual companions, speaking
ill of the noble ones, can expect these five drawbacks."

</article>
<article id="an5.212">

#### [AN 5.212]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Starting Arguments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaṇḍanakārakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who starts arguments, quarrels, disputes,
debates, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha can expect five
drawbacks. What five? They don't achieve the unachieved. What they have
achieved falls away. They get a bad reputation. They feel lost when they
die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A mendicant who starts
arguments, quarrels, disputes, debates, and disciplinary issues in the
Saṅgha can expect these five drawbacks."

</article>
<article id="an5.213">

#### [AN 5.213]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for an unethical person
because of their failure in ethics. What five?

Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person gets a bad reputation. This is the
second drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and
embarrassed, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person feels lost when they die. This is the
fourth drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
This is the fifth drawback. These are the five drawbacks for an
unethical person because of their failure in ethics.

There are these five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics. What five? Firstly, an ethical person gains
great wealth on account of diligence. This is the first benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person gets a good reputation. This is the
second benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and
self-assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person dies not feeling lost. This is the fourth
benefit.

Furthermore, when an ethical person's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth
benefit.

These are the five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics."

</article>
<article id="an5.214">

#### [AN 5.214]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Someone Who Talks a Lot ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahubhāṇisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a person who talks a
lot. What five? They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five
drawbacks for a person who talks a lot.

There are these five benefits for a person who talks thoughtfully. What
five? They don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five benefits for a person
who talks thoughtfully."

</article>
<article id="an5.215">

#### [AN 5.215]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Intolerance (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaakkhantisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and unlovable. You have lots of enmity
and many faults. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you dear and lovable. You have little enmity and few faults. You don't
feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

</article>
<article id="an5.216">

#### [AN 5.216]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Intolerance (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaakkhantisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and unlovable. You're cruel and
remorseful. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up,
after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you likable and lovable. You're neither cruel nor remorseful. You don't
feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

</article>
<article id="an5.217">

#### [AN 5.217]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Uninspiring Conduct (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaapāsādikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of uninspiring conduct. What
five? You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize
you. You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And when your
body breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of uninspiring
conduct.

There are these five benefits of inspiring conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. And when the body
breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.
These are the five benefits of inspiring conduct."

</article>
<article id="an5.218">

#### [AN 5.218]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Uninspiring Conduct (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaapāsādikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of uninspiring conduct. What
five? You don't inspire confidence in those without it. You cause some
with confidence to change their minds. You don't follow the Teacher's
instructions. Those who come after you follow your example. And your
mind doesn't become clear. These are the five drawbacks of uninspiring
conduct.

There are these five benefits of inspiring conduct. What five? You
inspire confidence in those without it. You increase confidence in those
who have it. You follow the Teacher's instructions. Those who come after
you follow your example. And your mind becomes clear. These are the five
benefits of inspiring conduct."

</article>
<article id="an5.219">

#### [AN 5.219]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fire ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a fire. What five? It's
bad for your eyes. It's bad for your complexion. It makes you weak. It
draws in groups. And it encourages low talk. These are the five
drawbacks of a fire."

</article>
<article id="an5.220">

#### [AN 5.220]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Madhurā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Madhurāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of Madhurā. What five? The
ground is uneven and dusty, the dogs are fierce, the native spirits are
vicious, and it's hard to get almsfood. These are the five drawbacks of
Madhurā."

</article>

[]{#an5-dighacarikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Long Wandering {#an5-dighacarikavagga.xhtml_an5-dighacarikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.221">

#### [AN 5.221]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Long Wandering (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamadīghacārikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't learn new things. You don't
clarify what you've learned. You lack confidence in some things you have
learned. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You learn new things. You clarify what you've learned. You have
confidence in some things you have learned. You don't contract severe
illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits of a reasonable
amount of wandering."

</article>
<article id="an5.222">

#### [AN 5.222]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Long Wandering (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyadīghacārikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't achieve the unachieved. What
you have achieved falls away. You lose confidence in some things you've
achieved. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You achieve the unachieved. What you have achieved doesn't fall
away. You're confident in some things you've achieved. You don't
contract severe illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits
of a reasonable amount of wandering."

</article>
<article id="an5.223">

#### [AN 5.223]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overstaying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atinivāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You have a lot of stuff and store it up. You have a lot of medicine and
store it up. You have a lot of duties and responsibilities, and become
capable in whatever needs to be done. You mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. And when you
leave that monastery, you miss it. These are the five drawbacks of
overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You don't have a lot of stuff and store it up. You
don't have a lot of medicine and store it up. You don't have a lot of
duties and responsibilities, or become capable in whatever needs to be
done. You don't mix closely with laypeople and renunciates, socializing
inappropriately like a layperson. And when you leave that monastery, you
don't miss it. These are the five benefits of staying for a reasonable
length of time."

</article>
<article id="an5.224">

#### [AN 5.224]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stingy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Maccharīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You become stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and
the teaching. These are the five drawbacks of overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You're not stingy with dwellings, families, material
things, praise, and the teaching. These are the five benefits of staying
for a reasonable length of time."

</article>
<article id="an5.225">

#### [AN 5.225]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Visiting Families (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakulūpakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of visiting families. What
five? You fall into an offense for wandering without leave. You fall
into an offense for sitting in a private place with someone of the
opposite sex. You fall into an offense for sitting in a hidden place
with someone of the opposite sex. You fall into an offense for teaching
more than five or six sentences to someone of the opposite sex. You have
a lot of sensual thoughts. These are the five drawbacks of visiting
families."

</article>
<article id="an5.226">

#### [AN 5.226]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Visiting Families (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakulūpakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a mendicant who visits
families for too long, mixing closely with them. What five? You often
see members of the opposite sex. Seeing them, you become close. Being so
close, you become intimate. Being intimate, lust overcomes you. When
your mind is swamped by lust, you can expect that you will lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit one of the corrupt offenses, or
resign the training and return to a lesser life. These are the five
drawbacks for a mendicant who visits families for too long, mixing
closely with them."

</article>
<article id="an5.227">

#### [AN 5.227]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Riches ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of riches. What five? Fire,
water, kings, thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share. These are the
five drawbacks of riches.

There are these five benefits of riches. What five? Riches enable you to
make yourself happy and pleased, to make your mother and father; your
children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff, and your friends
and colleagues happy and pleased, and to keep them all happy. And they
enable you to establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and
brahmins that's conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to
heaven. These are the five benefits of riches."

</article>
<article id="an5.228">

#### [AN 5.228]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eating Late ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ussūrabhattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a family who takes their
meals late in the day. What five? When guests visit, they are not served
on time. The deities who accept spirit-offerings are not served on time.
Ascetics and brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night, and from food at the wrong time are not served on time.
Bondservants, workers, and staff do their duties neglectfully. A meal
eaten during the wrong period is not nutritious. These are the five
drawbacks for a family who takes their meals late in the day.

There are these five benefits for a family who takes their meals at a
proper time. What five? When guests visit, they are served on time. The
deities who accept spirit-offerings are served on time. Ascetics and
brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at
night, and from food at the wrong time are served on time. Bondservants,
workers, and staff do their duties attentively. A meal eaten during the
proper period is nutritious. These are the five benefits for a family
who takes their meals at a proper time."

</article>
<article id="an5.229">

#### [AN 5.229]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Black Snakes (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakaṇhasappasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are
the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are the
five drawbacks of a female."

</article>
<article id="an5.230">

#### [AN 5.230]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Black Snakes (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakaṇhasappasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous.
These are the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous. This is
a female's venom: usually she's very lustful. This is a female's forked
tongue: usually she speaks divisively. This is a female's treachery:
usually she's an adulteress. These are the five drawbacks of a female."

</article>

[]{#an5-avasikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Resident Mendicant {#an5-avasikavagga.xhtml_an5-avasikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.231">

#### [AN 5.231]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Resident Mendicant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āvāsikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is not admirable.
What five? They're not accomplished in being well-presented and doing
their duties. They're not very learned and don't remember what they've
learned. They're not self-effacing and don't enjoy self-effacement.
They're not a good speaker and don't speak well. They're witless, dull,
and stupid. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is not
admirable.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is admirable. What five?
They're accomplished in being well-presented and doing their duties.
They're very learned and remember what they've learned. They're
self-effacing and enjoy self-effacement. They're a good speaker and
speak well. They're wise, bright, and clever. A resident mendicant with
these five qualities is admirable."

</article>
<article id="an5.232">

#### [AN 5.232]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Liked ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Piyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is dear and
beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice
that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an5.233">

#### [AN 5.233]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Beautification ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities beautifies the
monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice
that expresses the meaning.

They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire those who
approach them with a Dhamma talk.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities beautifies the
monastery."

</article>
<article id="an5.234">

#### [AN 5.234]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Very Helpful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahūpakārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is very helpful to
the monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They repair what is decayed and damaged.

When a large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad,
they go to the lay people and announce:

'A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad. Make
merit! Now is the time to make merit!'

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is very helpful to the
monastery."

</article>
<article id="an5.235">

#### [AN 5.235]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Sympathetic Mendicant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anukampasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities shows sympathy to
the lay people. What five? They encourage them in higher ethics. They
equip them to see the truth of the teachings. When they are sick, they
go to them and prompt their mindfulness, saying: 'Establish your
mindfulness, good sirs, in what is worthy.' When a large mendicant
Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad, they go to the lay
people and announce: 'A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with
mendicants from abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to make merit!' And
they eat whatever food they give them, solid or subtle, not wasting a
gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five qualities
shows sympathy to the lay people."

</article>
<article id="an5.236">

#### [AN 5.236]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deserving Criticism (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaavaṇṇārahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
Without examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are
dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things that are inspiring. And
they waste a gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't
arouse faith in things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in
things that are inspiring. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.237">

#### [AN 5.237]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deserving Criticism (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaavaṇṇārahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're not stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they don't waste a gift given in
faith. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.238">

#### [AN 5.238]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deserving Criticism (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaavaṇṇārahasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A resident
mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.239">

#### [AN 5.239]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stinginess (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, and praise. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, and praise. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.240">

#### [AN 5.240]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stinginess (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an5-duccaritavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Bad Conduct {#an5-duccaritavagga.xhtml_an5-duccaritavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.241">

#### [AN 5.241]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Conduct (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And when your body
breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. When your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These
are the five benefits of good conduct."

</article>
<article id="an5.242">

#### [AN 5.242]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Bodily Conduct (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakāyaduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.243">

#### [AN 5.243]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Verbal Conduct (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavacīduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.244">

#### [AN 5.244]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Mental Conduct (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamanoduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.245">

#### [AN 5.245]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Conduct (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You drift away from true teachings. You settle
on untrue teachings. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You drift away from untrue teachings. You settle on
true teachings. These are the five benefits of good conduct."

</article>
<article id="an5.246">

#### [AN 5.246]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Bodily Conduct (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakāyaduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.247">

#### [AN 5.247]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Verbal Conduct (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavacīduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.248">

#### [AN 5.248]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Mental Conduct (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamanoduccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

</article>
<article id="an5.249">

#### [AN 5.249]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Charnel Ground ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sivathikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks to a charnel ground. What
five?

It's filthy, stinking, frightening, a gathering place for savage
monsters, and a weeping place for many people. These are the five
drawbacks of a charnel ground.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a person like a charnel
ground. What five? To start with, a person has filthy conduct by way of
body, speech, and mind. This is how they're filthy, I say. That person
is just as filthy as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they get a bad reputation. This is how
they're stinky, I say. That person is just as stinky as a charnel
ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, good-hearted spiritual companions avoid
them from afar. That's how they're frightening, I say. That person is
just as frightening as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they live together with people of a
similar character. This is how they gather with savage monsters, I say.
That person is just as much a gathering place of savage monsters as a
charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, when good-hearted spiritual companions
see them they complain: 'Oh, it's so painful for us to have to live
together with such as these.' This is how there's weeping, I say. This
person is just as much a weeping place for many people as a charnel
ground.

These are the five drawbacks of a person like a charnel ground."

</article>
<article id="an5.250">

#### [AN 5.250]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faith in Individuals ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puggalappasādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of placing faith in an
individual. What five?

The individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an offense such
that the Saṅgha suspends them. It occurs to them: 'This person dear and
beloved to me has been suspended by the Saṅgha.' They lose much of their
faith in mendicants. So they don't frequent other mendicants, they don't
hear the true teaching, and they fall away from the true teaching. This
is the first drawback in placing faith in an individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an
offense such that the Saṅgha makes them sit at the end of the line. ...
This is the second drawback in placing faith in an individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted departs for
another region ... disrobes ... passes away. It occurs to them: 'This
person dear and beloved to me has passed away.' So they don't frequent
other mendicants, they don't hear the true teaching, and they fall away
from the true teaching. This is the fifth drawback in placing faith in
an individual.

These are the five drawbacks of placing faith in an individual."

</article>

[]{#an5-chatthapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Sixth Fifty {#an5-chatthapannasaka.xhtml_an5-chatthapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Ordination {#an5-chatthapannasaka.xhtml_an5-upasampadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.251">

#### [AN 5.251]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Who Should Give Ordination ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upasampādetabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, ordination should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Ordination should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an5.252">

#### [AN 5.252]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Who Should Give Dependence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, dependence should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Dependence should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an5.253">

#### [AN 5.253]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Who Should Have a Novice as Attendant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmaṇerasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a novice should attend on a mendicant with five qualities.
What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. A novice should attend on a mendicant with these five
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an5.254">

#### [AN 5.254]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Five Kinds of Stinginess ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcamacchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of stinginess. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. These are the five kinds of stinginess. The most contemptible
of these five kinds of stinginess is stinginess with the teachings."

</article>
<article id="an5.255">

#### [AN 5.255]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving Up Stinginess ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Macchariyappahānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
five kinds of stinginess. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. The spiritual life
is lived to give up and cut out these five kinds of stinginess."

</article>
<article id="an5.256">

#### [AN 5.256]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The First Absorption ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamajhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. Without giving up
these five qualities you can't enter and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. After giving up these five
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

</article>
<article id="an5.257-263">

#### [AN 5.257--263]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Second Absorption, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyajhānasuttādisattaka]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. Without giving up these five qualities you can't realize
perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the teachings. After
giving up these five qualities you can realize perfection."

</article>
<article id="an5.264">

#### [AN 5.264]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Another Discourse on the First Absorption ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparapaṭhamajhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and thankfulness. After
giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the first
absorption."

</article>
<article id="an5.265-271">

#### [AN 5.265--271]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Another Discourse on the Second Absorption, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparadutiyajhānasuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack
of gratitude and thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities
you can't realize perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. After giving up these five qualities you can realize
perfection."

</article>

[]{#an5-sammutipeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts on Appointments {#an5-sammutipeyyala.xhtml_an5-sammutipeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.272">

#### [AN 5.272]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Meal Designator ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhattuddesakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
meal designator. What five? They make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they don't know if
a meal has been assigned or not. A person with these five qualities
should not be appointed as meal designator.

A person with five qualities should be appointed as meal designator.
What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a meal has been
assigned or not. A person with these five qualities should be appointed
as meal designator.

A person with five qualities who has been appointed as meal designator
should not be called upon ... should be called upon ... should be known
as a fool ... should be known as astute ... they keep themselves broken
and damaged ... they keep themselves unbroken and undamaged ... is cast
down to hell ... is raised up to heaven. What five? They don't make
decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice.
And they know if a meal has been assigned or not. A meal designator with
these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.273-285">

#### [AN 5.273--285]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Lodgings Assigner ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Senāsanapaññāpakasuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
lodgings assigner ... they don't know if a lodging has been assigned or
not ... A person with five qualities should be appointed as lodgings
assigner ... they know if a lodging has been assigned or not ...

A person should not be appointed as lodgings allocator ... they don't
know if a lodging has been allocated or not ... A person should be
appointed as lodgings allocator ... they know if a lodging has been
allocated or not ...

A person should not be appointed as storeperson ... they don't know if
stores are protected or not ... A person should be appointed as
storeperson ... they know if stores are protected or not ...

... robe receiver ...

... robe distributor ...

... porridge distributor ...

... fruit distributor ...

... cake distributor ...

... dispenser of minor accessories ...

... allocator of bathing cloths ...

... bowl allocator ...

... supervisor of monastery staff ...

... supervisor of novices ...

What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a novice has been
supervised or not. A supervisor of novices with these five qualities is
raised up to heaven."

</article>

[]{#an5-sikkhapadapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts on Training Rules {#an5-sikkhapadapeyyala.xhtml_an5-sikkhapadapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.286">

#### [AN 5.286]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Monk ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhikkhusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a monk with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
He kills living creatures, steals, has sex, lies, and uses alcoholic
drinks that cause negligence. A monk with these five qualities is cast
down to hell.

A monk with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? He doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, have sex, lie, or use alcoholic drinks
that cause negligence. A monk with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.287-292">

#### [AN 5.287--292]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Nun ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhikkhunīsuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five? They
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and use
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. With these five qualities
they're cast down to hell.

A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. With these five qualities
they're raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an5.293">

#### [AN 5.293]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Ājīvaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ājīvakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an Ājīvaka ascetic with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They kill living creatures, steal, have sex, lie, and
use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. An Ājīvaka ascetic with
these five qualities is cast down to hell."

</article>
<article id="an5.294-302">

#### [AN 5.294--302]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Jain Ascetic, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nigaṇṭhasuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A Jain ascetic ... disciple of the shavelings ... a matted-hair ascetic
... a wanderer ... a follower of Māgaṇḍiya ... a trident-bearing ascetic
... a follower of the unobstructed ... a follower of Gotama ... one who
performs rituals for the gods ... with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, and use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. With
these five qualities they're cast down to hell."

</article>

[]{#an5-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an5-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an5-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an5.303">

#### [AN 5.303]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an5.304">

#### [AN 5.304]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an5.305">

#### [AN 5.305]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence,
the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up,
and the perception of fading away. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an5.306">

#### [AN 5.306]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For
insight into greed, these five things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an5.307">

#### [AN 5.307]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (5th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For insight
into greed, these five things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an5.308-1152">

#### [AN 5.308--1152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, five things should be developed."

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... five things should be developed.

What five? The powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. For the letting go of negligence, these five things should be
developed."

The Book of the Fives is finished.

</article>

[]{#an6.xhtml}

# The Book of the Sixes {#an6.xhtml_an6 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an6-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an6-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an6-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Worthy of Offerings {#an6-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an6-ahuneyyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.1">

#### [AN 6.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who, when they see a sight with their eyes, is neither
happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad.
They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="an6.2">

#### [AN 6.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful. They control the body as far as the Brahmā realm.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in samādhi ... mind
not immersed in samādhi ... freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind
as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the noble
ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the
noble ones; they had right view; and they acted out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.3">

#### [AN 6.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faculties ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Indriyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.4">

#### [AN 6.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The powers of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.5">

#### [AN 6.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

What six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's beautiful. A fine royal
thoroughbred with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.6">

#### [AN 6.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's strong. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.7">

#### [AN 6.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Thoroughbred (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's fast. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.8">

#### [AN 6.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unsurpassable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuttariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things are unsurpassable. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection. These are the six unsurpassable things."

</article>
<article id="an6.9">

#### [AN 6.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Topics for Recollection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anussatiṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these six topics for recollection. What six? The
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, ethics,
generosity, and the deities. These are the six topics for recollection."

</article>
<article id="an6.10">

#### [AN 6.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahānāma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahānāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions, what kind of meditation do they frequently practice?"

"Mahānāma, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood
the instructions they frequently practice this kind of meditation.

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who lives in
balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
develop the recollection of the Buddha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called
a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced,
and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the teaching.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' When a noble disciple recollects
the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This
is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are
unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've
entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct,
which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When a noble
disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a noble disciple who lives
in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
develop the recollection of ethics.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of generosity.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of Brahmā's host, and gods
even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here, they
were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity,
and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the
deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple
whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the
teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. When you're joyful,
rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes
tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel bliss. And when you're
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble
disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives
untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of
the teaching and develop the recollection of the deities.

When a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions this is the kind of meditation they frequently practice."

</article>

[]{#an6-saraniyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Warm-hearted {#an6-saraniyavagga.xhtml_an6-saraniyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.11">

#### [AN 6.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Warm-hearted (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these six warm-hearted qualities. What six?

Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with
bodily kindness, both in public and in private. This is a warm-hearted
quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a warm-hearted quality.

These are the six warm-hearted qualities."

</article>
<article id="an6.12">

#### [AN 6.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Warm-hearted (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.
What six?

Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with
bodily kindness, both in public and in private. This warm-hearted
quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony,
and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling."

</article>
<article id="an6.13">

#### [AN 6.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements of Escape ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these six elements of escape. What six?

Take a mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by love.
I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it up,
consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow ill will still
occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! Don't say
that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha
is not good. And the Buddha would not say that. It's impossible,
reverend, it cannot happen that the heart's release by love has been
developed and properly implemented, yet somehow ill will still occupies
the mind. For it is the heart's release by love that is the escape from
ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow discontent
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by rejoicing that is the escape from
discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow desire
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by equanimity that is the escape from
desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow my
consciousness still follows after signs.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! ... For it is the signless release of the heart that is the
escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupies the mind.
For it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from
the dart of doubt and indecision.'

These are the six elements of escape."

</article>
<article id="an6.14">

#### [AN 6.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Good Death ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaddakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant lives life so as to not have a good death. And how do they
live life so as to not have a good death?

Take a mendicant who relishes work, talk, sleep, company, closeness, and
proliferation. They love these things and like to relish them. A
mendicant who lives life like this does not have a good death. This is
called a mendicant who enjoys substantial reality, who hasn't given up
substantial reality to rightly make an end of suffering.

A mendicant lives life so as to have a good death. And how do they live
life so as to have a good death?

Take a mendicant who doesn't relish work, talk, sleep, company,
closeness, and proliferation. They don't love these things or like to
relish them. A mendicant who lives life like this has a good death. This
is called a mendicant who delights in extinguishment, who has given up
substantial reality to rightly make an end of suffering.

> A beast who likes to proliferate,\
> enjoying proliferation,\
> fails to win extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> But one who gives up proliferation,\
> enjoying the state of non-proliferation,\
> wins extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

</article>
<article id="an6.15">

#### [AN 6.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Regret ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anutappiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"As a mendicant makes their bed, so they must lie in it, and die
tormented by regrets. And how do they die tormented by regrets?

Take a mendicant who relishes work, talk, sleep, company, closeness, and
proliferation. They love these things and like to relish them. A
mendicant who makes their bed like this must lie in it, and die
tormented by regrets. This is called a mendicant who enjoys substantial
reality, who hasn't given up substantial reality to rightly make an end
of suffering.

As a mendicant makes their bed, so they must lie in it, and die free of
regrets. And how do they die free of regrets?

Take a mendicant who doesn't relish work, talk, sleep, company,
closeness, and proliferation. They don't love these things or like to
relish them. A mendicant who makes their bed like this must lie in it,
and die free of regrets. This is called a mendicant who delights in
extinguishment, who has given up substantial reality to rightly make an
end of suffering.

> A beast who likes to proliferate,\
> enjoying proliferation,\
> fails to win extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> But one who gives up proliferation,\
> enjoying the state of non-proliferation,\
> wins extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

</article>
<article id="an6.16">

#### [AN 6.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nakula's Father ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nakulapitusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. Now at that time
the householder Nakula's father was sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then
the housewife Nakula's mother said to him:

"Householder, don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering,
and it's criticized by the Buddha. Householder, you might think: 'When
I've gone, the housewife Nakula's mother won't be able to provide for
the children and keep up the household carpets.' But you should not see
it like this. I'm skilled at spinning cotton and carding wool. I'm able
to provide for the children and keep up the household carpets. So
householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'When I've gone, the housewife Nakula's
mother will take another husband.' But you should not see it like this.
Both you and I know that we have remained celibate while at home for the
past sixteen years. So householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'When I've gone, the housewife Nakula's
mother won't want to see the Buddha and his Saṅgha of mendicants.' But
you should not see it like this. When you've gone, I'll want to see the
Buddha and his mendicant Saṅgha even more. So householder, don't pass
away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother won't
fulfill ethics.' But you should not see it like this. I am one of those
white-robed disciples of the Buddha who fulfills their ethics. Whoever
doubts this can go and ask the Buddha. He is staying in the land of the
Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. So
householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother doesn't
have internal serenity of heart.' But you should not see it like this. I
am one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has internal
serenity of heart. Whoever doubts this can go and ask the Buddha. He is
staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park
at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. So householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother has not
gained a basis, a firm basis, and solace in this teaching and training.
She has not gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained
assurance. And she's not independent of others in the Teacher's
instructions.' But you should not see it like this. I am one of those
white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has gained a basis, a firm
basis, and solace in this teaching and training. I have gone beyond
doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained assurance. And I am independent
of others in the Teacher's instructions. Whoever doubts this can go and
ask the Buddha. He is staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile
Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. So householder, don't pass
away with concerns. Such concern is suffering, and it's criticized by
the Buddha."

And then, as Nakula's mother was giving this advice to Nakula's father,
his illness died down on the spot. And that's how Nakula's father
recovered from that illness. Soon after recovering, leaning on a staff
he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said
to him:

"You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, to have the housewife
Nakula's mother advise and instruct you out of kindness and sympathy.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who fulfills
their ethics.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has internal
serenity of heart.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has gained a
basis, a firm basis, and solace in this teaching and training. She has
gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained assurance. And she
is independent of others in the Teacher's instructions.

You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, to have the housewife
Nakula's mother advise and instruct you out of kindness and sympathy."

</article>
<article id="an6.17">

#### [AN 6.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sleep ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soppasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to the
assembly hall, and sat down on the seat spread out. Venerable Sāriputta
also came out of retreat, went to the assembly hall, bowed to the Buddha
and sat down to one side. Venerables Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa,
Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita, Mahācunda, Mahākappina, Anuruddha, Revata,
and Ānanda did the same. The Buddha spent much of the night sitting in
meditation, then got up from his seat and entered his dwelling. And soon
after the Buddha left those venerables each went to their own dwelling.

But those mendicants who were junior, recently gone forth, newly come to
this teaching and training slept until the sun came up, snoring. The
Buddha saw them doing this, with his clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman. He went to the assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread
out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, where is Sāriputta? Where are Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa,
Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita, Mahācunda, Mahākappina, Anuruddha, Revata,
and Ānanda? Where have these senior disciples gone?"

"Soon after the Buddha left those venerables each went to their own
dwelling."

"So, mendicants, when the senior mendicants left, why did you sleep
until the sun came up, snoring?

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an
anointed aristocratic king who rules his whole life, dear and beloved to
the country, while indulging in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing as much as he likes?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an
appointed official ... a hereditary official ... a general ... a village
chief ... or a guild head who runs the guild his whole life, dear and
beloved to the guild, while indulging in the pleasures of sleeping,
lying down, and drowsing as much as he likes?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an ascetic
or brahmin who indulges in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and
drowsing as much as they like? Their sense doors are unguarded, they eat
too much, they're not dedicated to wakefulness, they're unable to
discern skillful qualities, and they don't pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Yet
they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements."

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

So you should train like this: 'We will guard our sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an6.18">

#### [AN 6.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Fish Dealer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Macchabandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

While walking along the road he saw a fish dealer in a certain spot
selling fish that he had killed himself. Seeing this he left the road,
sat at the root of a tree on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants, do you see that fish dealer selling fish that
he killed himself?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a fish
dealer selling fish that he killed himself who, by means of that work
and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or vehicle,
or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the fish are led to the slaughter he regards them
with bad intentions.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a butcher
of cattle selling cattle that he killed himself who, by means of that
work and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or
vehicle, or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the cattle are led to the slaughter he regards
them with bad intentions.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a butcher
of sheep ... a butcher of pigs ... a butcher of poultry ... or a
deer-hunter selling deer which he killed himself who, by means of that
work and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or
vehicle, or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the deer are led to the slaughter he regards them
with bad intentions.

By regarding even animals led to the slaughter with bad intentions he
did not get to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or vehicle, or to
enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune. How much worse is someone
who regards human beings brought to the slaughter with bad intentions!
This will be for their lasting harm and suffering. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell."

</article>
<article id="an6.19">

#### [AN 6.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of Death (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamaraṇassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. But do you develop mindfulness of death?"

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, I
develop mindfulness of death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day and
night, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve
a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat a meal of almsfood, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow a single mouthful, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out,
I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a
lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

When this was said, the Buddha said to those mendicants:

"As to the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to
live for a day and night ... or to live for a day ... or to live as long
as it takes to eat a meal of almsfood ... or to live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls---these are called mendicants
who live negligently. They slackly develop mindfulness of death for the
ending of defilements.

But as to the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to
live as long as it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful ... or to
live as long as it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to
breathe in after breathing out---these are called mendicants who live
diligently. They keenly develop mindfulness of death for the ending of
defilements.

So you should train like this: 'We will live diligently. We will keenly
develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.' That's how
you should train."

</article>
<article id="an6.20">

#### [AN 6.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of Death (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamaraṇassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. And how is mindfulness of death developed
and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial, to culminate in
freedom from death and end in freedom from death?

As day passes by and night draws close, a mendicant reflects: 'I might
die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or centipede
might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to me.
Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food poisoning, or suffer a
disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds. And if I died from that
it would be an obstacle to my progress. ' That mendicant should reflect:
'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given up, which
might be an obstacle to my progress if I die tonight?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant
should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Or else, as night passes by and day draws close, a mendicant reflects:
'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or
centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an
obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food
poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds.
And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my progress. ' That
mendicant should reflect: 'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that
I haven't given up, which might be an obstacle to my progress if I die
today?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant
should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death."

</article>

[]{#an6-anuttariyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Unsurpassable {#an6-anuttariyavagga.xhtml_an6-anuttariyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.21">

#### [AN 6.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Sāma Village ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near the
little village of Sāma, by a lotus pond.

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire lotus
pond, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, three qualities lead to the decline of a mendicant. What three?
Relishing work, talk, and sleep. These three qualities lead to the
decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, adding:

"It's unfortunate for those of you who even the deities know are
declining in skillful qualities. I will teach you three more qualities
that lead to decline. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, are three qualities that lead to decline?
Enjoyment of company, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.
These three qualities lead to decline.

Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who decline in
skillful qualities do so because of these six qualities."

</article>
<article id="an6.22">

#### [AN 6.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparihāniyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you these six principles that prevent decline.
... And what, mendicants, are the six principles that prevent decline?
Not relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, being easy to admonish,
and having good friends. These six qualities prevent decline.

Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who have not declined
in skillful qualities do so because of these six qualities."

</article>
<article id="an6.23">

#### [AN 6.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dangers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"'Danger', mendicants, is a term for sensual pleasures. 'Suffering',
'disease', 'boil', 'snare', and 'bog' are terms for sensual pleasures.

And why is 'danger' a term for sensual pleasures? Someone who is
besotted by sensual greed and shackled by lustful desire is not freed
from dangers in the present life or in lives to come. That is why
'danger' is a term for sensual pleasures.

And why are 'suffering', 'disease', 'boil', 'snare', and 'bog' terms for
sensual pleasures? Someone who is besotted by sensual greed and shackled
by lustful desire is not freed from suffering, disease, boils, chains,
or bogs in the present life or in lives to come. That is why these are
terms for sensual pleasures.

> Danger, suffering, disease, boils,\
> and snares and bogs both.\
> These describe the sensual pleasures\
> to which ordinary people are attached.
>
> Seeing the danger in grasping,\
> the origin of birth and death,\
> the unattached are freed\
> with the ending of birth and death.
>
> Happy, they've come to a safe place,\
> quenched in this very life.\
> They've gone beyond all threats and dangers,\
> and risen above all suffering."

</article>
<article id="an6.24">

#### [AN 6.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Himalaya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Himavantasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities could shatter Himalaya,
the king of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance! What six? It's
when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining
in immersion, skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening
the mind for immersion, skilled in the meditation subjects for
immersion, and skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion. A
mendicant who has these six qualities could shatter Himalaya, the king
of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance!"

</article>
<article id="an6.25">

#### [AN 6.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Topics for Recollection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anussatiṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these six topics for recollection. What six?

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving. They've left
behind greed; they're free of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a
term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation. Relying on this, some
sentient beings are purified in this way.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' When a noble disciple recollects
the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical precepts,
which are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When
a noble disciple recollects their ethical precepts their mind is not
full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their generosity
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of Brahmā's host, and gods
even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here, they
were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity,
and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom.'

When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is
not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is
unswerving. They've left behind greed; they're free of it and have risen
above it. 'Greed' is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.
Relying on this, some sentient beings are purified in this way.

These are the six topics for recollection."

</article>
<article id="an6.26">

#### [AN 6.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahākaccāna ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahākaccānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Mahākaccāna addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākaccāna said this:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found
an opening amid confinement; that is, the six topics for recollection.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment. What six?

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving. They've left
behind greed; they're free of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a
term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation. That noble disciple
meditates with a heart just like space, abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Relying on this, some sentient beings
become pure in this way.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' When a noble disciple recollects
the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical precepts,
which are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When
a noble disciple recollects their ethical precepts their mind is not
full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own
generosity their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of Brahmā's host, and gods
even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here, they
were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity,
and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the
deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving. They've left behind greed; they're free
of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a term for the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. That noble disciple meditates with a heart just
like space, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Relying on this, some sentient beings become pure in this way.

It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who knows
and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found an
opening amid confinement; that is, the six topics for recollection. They
are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying,
to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to
realize extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an6.27">

#### [AN 6.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Proper Occasions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasamayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, how many occasions are there for going to see an esteemed
mendicant?"

"Mendicant, there are six occasions for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. What six?

Firstly, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and mired
in sensual desire, and they don't truly understand the escape from
sensual desire that has arisen. On that occasion they should go to an
esteemed mendicant and say: 'My heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire, and I don't truly understand the escape from sensual desire that
has arisen. Venerable, please teach me how to give up sensual desire.'
Then that esteemed mendicant teaches them how to give up sensual desire.
This is the first occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in ill will ... This is the second occasion for going to see an
esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in dullness and drowsiness ... This is the third occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in restlessness and remorse ... This is the fourth occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in doubt ... This is the fifth occasion for going to see an
esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant doesn't understand what
kind of meditation they need to focus on in order to end the defilements
in the present life. On that occasion they should go to an esteemed
mendicant and say: 'I don't understand what kind of meditation to focus
on in order to end the defilements in the present life. Venerable,
please teach me how to end the defilements.' Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to end the defilements. This is the sixth
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

These are the six occasions for going to see an esteemed mendicant."

</article>
<article id="an6.28">

#### [AN 6.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Proper Occasions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasamayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the
deer park at Isipatana. Then after the meal, on their return from
almsround, this discussion came up among them while sitting together in
the pavilion.

"Reverends, how many occasions are there for going to see an esteemed
mendicant?"

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Reverends, there's a time after an esteemed mendicant's meal when they
return from almsround. Having washed their feet they sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. That is the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time the fatigue from walking and from eating has
not faded away. There's a time late in the afternoon when an esteemed
mendicant comes out of retreat. They sit cross-legged in the shade of
their porch , set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. That is the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time they are still practicing the same
meditation subject as a basis of immersion that they focused on during
the day. There's a time when an esteemed mendicant has risen at the
crack of dawn. They sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence. That is the proper occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time their body is full of vitality and they find
it easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas."

When this was said, Venerable Mahākaccāna said to those senior
mendicants:

"Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Mendicants, there are six occasions for going to see an esteemed
mendicant.

What six? Firstly, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome
and mired in sensual desire, and they don't truly understand the escape
from sensual desire that has arisen. On that occasion they should go to
an esteemed mendicant and say:

"My heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, and I don't truly
understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. Venerable,
please teach me how to give up sensual desire." Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to give up sensual desire. This is the first
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and
remorse ... doubt ...

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant doesn't understand what
kind of meditation they need to focus on in order to end the defilements
in the present life. On that occasion they should go to an esteemed
mendicant and say, "I don't understand what kind of meditation to focus
on in order to end the defilements in the present life. Venerable,
please teach me how to end the defilements." Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to end the defilements. This is the sixth
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.'

Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'These are the six occasions for going to see an esteemed mendicant.'"

</article>
<article id="an6.29">

#### [AN 6.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Udāyī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udāyīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the Buddha said to Udāyī, "Udāyī, how many topics for recollection
are there?"

When he said this, Udāyī kept silent.

And a second time ... and a third time, the Buddha said to him, "Udāyī,
how many topics for recollection are there?"

And a second time and a third time Udāyī kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Udāyī, "Reverend Udāyī, the
teacher is addressing you."

"Reverend Ānanda, I hear the Buddha.

It's when a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
This is a topic for recollection."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, I know that this
futile man Udāyī is not committed to the higher mind. Ānanda, how many
topics for recollection are there?"

"Sir, there are five topics for recollection. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption. When this topic of
recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to
blissful meditation in this very life.

Furthermore, a mendicant focuses on the perception of light, focusing on
the perception of day regardless of whether it's night or day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance. When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in
this way it leads to knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of filth. 'In this body there is head hair, body hair,
nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food,
feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva,
snot, synovial fluid, urine.' When this topic of recollection is
developed and cultivated in this way it leads to giving up sensual
desire.

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse thrown in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and festering. They'd compare it with their own body:
'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go
beyond that.'

Or suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel ground being
devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, and many kinds of
little creatures. They'd compare it with their own body: 'This body is
also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.'

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ... A
skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ... A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews
... Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone, there a thigh-bone, here a
hip-bone, there a rib-bone, here a back-bone, there an arm-bone, here a
neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there the skull ... White
bones, the color of shells ... Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...
Bones rotted and crumbled to powder. They'd compare it with their own
body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot
go beyond that.' When this topic of recollection is developed and
cultivated in this way it leads to uprooting the conceit 'I am'.

Furthermore, a mendicant, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. When
this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it
leads to the penetration of many elements. These are the five topics for
recollection."

"Good, good, Ānanda. Well then, Ānanda, you should also remember this
sixth topic for recollection. In this case, a mendicant goes out
mindfully, returns mindfully, stands mindfully, sits mindfully, lies
down mindfully, and focuses on work mindfully. When this topic of
recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to
mindfulness and situational awareness."

</article>
<article id="an6.30">

#### [AN 6.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unsurpassable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuttariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things are unsurpassable. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection.

And what is the unsurpassable seeing? Some people go to see an
elephant-treasure, a horse-treasure, a jewel-treasure, or a diverse
spectrum of sights; or ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong
practice. There is such a seeing, I don't deny it. That seeing is low,
crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. The unsurpassable seeing is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, goes to see a Realized One or their
disciple. This is in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow
and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system,
and to realize extinguishment. This is called the unsurpassable seeing.
Such is the unsurpassable seeing.

But what of the unsurpassable hearing? Some people go to hear the sound
of drums, arched harps, singing, or a diverse spectrum of sounds; or
ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such a
hearing, I don't deny it. That hearing ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable hearing is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, goes to hear the teaching of a
Realized One or one of his disciples. ... This is called the
unsurpassable hearing. Such is the unsurpassable seeing and hearing.

But what of the unsurpassable acquisition? Some people acquire a child,
a wife, wealth, or a diverse spectrum of things; or they acquire faith
in an ascetic or brahmin of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such
an acquisition, I don't deny it. That acquisition ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable acquisition is when someone with
settled faith and love, sure and devoted, acquires faith in a Realized
One or their disciple. ... This is called the unsurpassable acquisition.
Such is the unsurpassable seeing, hearing, and acquisition.

But what of the unsurpassable training? Some people train in elephant
riding, horse riding, chariot driving, archery, swordsmanship, or a
diverse spectrum of things; or they train under an ascetic or brahmin of
wrong view and wrong practice. There is such a training, I don't deny
it. That training ... doesn't lead to extinguishment. The unsurpassable
training is when someone with settled faith and love, sure and devoted,
trains in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom in
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. ... This is
called the unsurpassable training. Such is the unsurpassable seeing,
hearing, acquisition, and training.

But what of the unsurpassable service? Some people serve an aristocrat,
a brahmin, a householder, or a diverse spectrum of people; or they serve
ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such
service, I don't deny it. That service ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable service is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, serves a Realized One or their
disciple. ... This is called the unsurpassable service. Such is the
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, and service.

But what of the unsurpassable recollection? Some people recollect a
child, a wife, wealth, or a diverse spectrum of things; or they
recollect an ascetic or brahmin of wrong view and wrong practice. There
is such recollection, I don't deny it. That recollection is low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
The unsurpassable recollection is when someone with settled faith and
love, sure and devoted, recollects a Realized One or their disciple. ...
This is called the unsurpassable recollection.

These are the six unsurpassable things.

> They've gained the unsurpassed seeing,\
> the unsurpassed hearing,\
> and the unsurpassable acquisition.\
> They enjoy the unsurpassable training
>
> and serve with care.\
> Then they develop recollection\
> connected with seclusion,\
> which is safe, and leads to freedom from death.
>
> They rejoice in diligence,\
> alert and ethically restrained.\
> And in time they arrive\
> at the place where suffering ceases."

</article>

[]{#an6-pathamapannasaka-devatavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Deities {#an6-pathamapannasaka-devatavagga.xhtml_an6-pathamapannasaka-devatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.31">

#### [AN 6.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These six things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What six?
They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don't guard the sense
doors, and they eat too much. These six things lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

These six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
six? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They guard the
sense doors, and they don't eat too much. These six things don't lead to
the decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an6.32">

#### [AN 6.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaaparihānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What
six? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the
training, for diligence, and for hospitality. These six things don't
lead to the decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, adding:

> "Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> a mendicant who respects diligence\
> and hospitality\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an6.33">

#### [AN 6.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaaparihānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's Grove, came to
me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What six? Respect for the
Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training, for
conscience, and for prudence. These six things don't lead to the decline
of a mendicant.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there.

> Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> having both conscience and prudence,\
> reverential and respectful,\
> such a one can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an6.34">

#### [AN 6.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahāmoggallāna ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahāmoggallānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then as Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was in private retreat this thought
came to his mind, "Which gods know that they are stream-enterers, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening?"

Now, at that time a monk called Tissa had recently passed away and been
reborn in a Brahmā realm. There they knew that Tissa the Brahmā was very
mighty and powerful.

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong person would
extend or contract their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared
in that Brahmā realm.

Tissa saw Moggallāna coming off in the distance, and said to him, "Come,
my good Moggallāna! Welcome, my good Moggallāna! It's been a long time
since you took the opportunity to come here. Sit, my good Moggallāna,
this seat is for you." Moggallāna sat down on the seat spread out. Then
Tissa bowed to Moggallāna and sat to one side.

Moggallāna said to him, "Tissa, which gods know that they are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

"The gods of the four great kings know this."

"But do all of them know this?"

"No, my good Moggallāna, not all of them. Those who lack experiential
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and lack the
ethics loved by the noble ones, do not know that they are
stream-enterers. But those who have experiential confidence in the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and have the ethics loved by the
noble ones, do know that they are stream-enterers."

"But Tissa, is it only the gods of the four great kings who know that
they are stream-enterers, or do the gods of the thirty-three ... the
gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ...
and the gods who control what is imagined by others know that they are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

"The gods of these various classes know this."

"But do all of them know this?"

"No, my good Moggallāna, not all of them. Those who lack experiential
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and lack the
ethics loved by the noble ones, do not know that they are
stream-enterers. But those who have experiential confidence in the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and have the ethics loved by the
noble ones, do know that they are stream-enterers."

Moggallāna approved and agreed with what Tissa the Brahmā said. Then, as
easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he
vanished from that Brahmā realm and reappeared in Jeta's Grove.

</article>
<article id="an6.35">

#### [AN 6.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Play a Part in Realization ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vijjābhāgiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These six things play a part in realization. What six? The perception
of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence, the
perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up, the
perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation. These are
the six things that play a part in realization."

</article>
<article id="an6.36">

#### [AN 6.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Roots of Arguments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vivādamūlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these six roots of arguments. What six? Firstly,
a mendicant is irritable and acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they
don't fulfill the training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which
is for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people,
for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If you see
such a root of arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give
up this bad thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it
doesn't come up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of
arguments, so it doesn't come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ... with corrupt wishes and
wrong view ... They're attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for
the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don't fulfill the
training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the
detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the
harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a
root of arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up
this bad thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it
doesn't come up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of
arguments, so it doesn't come up in the future. These are the six roots
of arguments."

</article>
<article id="an6.37">

#### [AN 6.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Gift With Six Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chaḷaṅgadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother, was preparing a religious
donation with six factors for the mendicant Saṅgha headed by Sāriputta
and Moggallāna. The Buddha saw her doing this, with his clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, and he addressed the mendicants:

"This Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother, is preparing a religious donation
with six factors for the mendicant Saṅgha headed by Sāriputta and
Moggallāna.

And how does a religious donation have six factors? Three factors apply
to the donor and three to the recipients.

What three factors apply to the donor? It's when a donor is in a good
mood before giving, while giving they feel confident, and after giving
they're uplifted. These three factors apply to the donor.

What three factors apply to the recipients? It's when the recipients are
free of greed, hate, and delusion, or practicing to be free of them.
These three factors apply to the recipients.

Thus three factors apply to the donor and three to the recipients.
That's how a religious donation has six factors.

It's not easy to grasp the merit of such a six-factored donation by
saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing
goodness that nurtures happiness and is conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness and leading to heaven. And it leads to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. It's simply reckoned as
an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.

It's like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It's not easy
to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of
thousands of gallons there are. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of water. In the same way, it's not easy to
grasp the merit of such a six-factored donation ...

> A good mood before giving,\
> confidence while giving,\
> feeling uplifted after giving:\
> this is the perfect sacrifice.
>
> Free of greed, free of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled;\
> this is the field for the perfect sacrifice,\
> the disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> After rinsing,\
> you give with your own hands.\
> This sacrifice is very fruitful\
> for both yourself and others.
>
> When an intelligent, faithful person,\
> sacrifices like this, with a mind of letting go,\
> that astute one is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

</article>
<article id="an6.38">

#### [AN 6.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One's Own Volition ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Attakārīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, this is my doctrine and view: One does not act of one's
own volition, nor does one act of another's volition."

"Brahmin, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view! How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that
one does not act of one's own volition, nor does one act of another's
volition?

What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of initiative?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who initiate activity?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since there is an element of initiative, and sentient beings who
initiate activity are found, sentient beings act of their own volition
or that of another.

What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of persistence ...
exertion ... strength ... endurance ... energy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who have energy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since there is an element of energy, and sentient beings who have
energy are found, sentient beings act of their own volition or that of
another.

Brahmin, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view! How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that
one does not act of one's own volition, nor does one act of another's
volition?"

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an6.39">

#### [AN 6.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sources ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.
Greed doesn't give rise to contentment. Rather, greed just gives rise to
greed. Hate doesn't give rise to love. Rather, hate just gives rise to
hate. Delusion doesn't give rise to understanding. Rather, delusion just
gives rise to delusion. It's not because of deeds born of greed, hate,
and delusion that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are
found. Rather, it's because of deeds born of greed, hate, and delusion
that hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places
are found. These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise
to deeds. Contentment doesn't give rise to greed. Rather, contentment
just gives rise to contentment. Love doesn't give rise to hate. Rather,
love just gives rise to love. Understanding doesn't give rise to
delusion. Rather, understanding just gives rise to understanding. It's
not because of deeds born of contentment, love, and understanding that
hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are
found. Rather, it's because of deeds born of contentment, love, and
understanding that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are
found. These are three sources that give rise to deeds."

</article>
<article id="an6.40">

#### [AN 6.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kimbila ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kimilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then Venerable Kimbila went up
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training,
diligence, and hospitality after the final quenching of the Realized
One. This is the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain
respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, diligence, and hospitality after the final quenching of the
Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why the true
teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an6.41">

#### [AN 6.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Tree Trunk ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dārukkhandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying
near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, descended the Vulture's Peak together with several mendicants.
At a certain spot he saw a large tree trunk, and he addressed the
mendicants, "Reverends, do you see this large tree trunk?"

"Yes, reverend."

"If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has mastered
their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but earth. Why
is that? Because the earth element exists in the tree trunk. Relying on
that a mendicant with psychic powers could determine it to be nothing
but earth. If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has
mastered their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but
water. ... Or they could determine it to be nothing but fire ... Or they
could determine it to be nothing but air ... Or they could determine it
to be nothing but beautiful ... Or they could determine it to be nothing
but ugly. Why is that? Because the element of ugliness exists in the
tree trunk. Relying on that a mendicant with psychic powers could
determine it to be nothing but ugly."

</article>
<article id="an6.42">

#### [AN 6.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nāgita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāgitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Icchānaṅgala. He
stayed in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of
Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased; and he explains a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones." Then, when the night
had passed, they took many fresh and cooked foods and went to the forest
near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood outside the gates making a dreadful
racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's attendant. Then the
Buddha said to Nāgita, "Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd
think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala. They've
brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing outside the
gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the mendicant
Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

Take a mendicant living within a village who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now a monastery worker, a novice, or a
fellow practitioner will make this venerable fall from immersion.' So
I'm not pleased that that mendicant is living within a village.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting nodding in
meditation. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable, having dispelled
that sleepiness and weariness, will focus just on the unified perception
of wilderness.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is living in the
wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting without being
immersed in samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now if this venerable's mind is
not immersed in samādhi they will immerse it, or if it is immersed in
samādhi, they will preserve it.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is
living in the wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable will free the unfreed
mind or preserve the freed mind.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is
living in the wilderness.

Take a mendicant who I see living within a village receiving robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Enjoying
possessions, honor, and popularity they neglect retreat, and they
neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. They come down
to villages, towns, and capital cities and make their home there. So I'm
not pleased that that mendicant is living within a village.

Take a mendicant who I see in the wilderness receiving robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Fending off
possessions, honor, and popularity they don't neglect retreat, and they
don't neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. So I'm
pleased that that mendicant is living in the wilderness.

Nāgita, when I'm walking along a road and I don't see anyone ahead or
behind I feel relaxed, even if I need to urinate or defecate."

</article>

[]{#an6-dhammikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Dhammika {#an6-dhammikavagga.xhtml_an6-dhammikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.43">

#### [AN 6.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Giant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery for the
day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the Eastern Monastery. In the late
afternoon the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda, "Come,
Ānanda, let's go to the eastern gate to bathe."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the
eastern gate to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged from the water he
stood in one robe drying his limbs.

Now, at that time King Pasenadi had a giant bull elephant called
"White". It emerged from the eastern gate to the beating and playing of
musical instruments.

When people saw it they said, "The royal giant is so handsome! The royal
giant is so good-looking! The royal giant is so lovely! The royal giant
has such a huge body!"

When they said this, Venerable Udāyī said to the Buddha, "Sir, is it
only when they see elephants with such a huge, formidable body that
people say: 'A giant, such a giant'? Or do they say it when they see any
other creatures with huge, formidable bodies?"

"Udāyī, when they see elephants with such a huge, formidable body people
say: 'A giant, such a giant!'

And also when they see a horse with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a bull with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a serpent with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a tree with a huge, formidable body ...

And when they see a human being with such a huge, formidable body people
say: 'A giant, such a giant!'

But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way of body, speech, and
mind is who I call a 'giant' in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well said this was by the
Buddha: 'But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way of body,
speech, and mind is who I call a "giant" in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its
gods and humans.' And I celebrate the well-spoken words of the Buddha
with these verses:

> Awakened as a human being,\
> self-tamed and immersed in samādhi,\
> following the spiritual path,\
> he loves peace of mind.
>
> Revered by people,\
> gone beyond all things,\
> even the gods revere him;\
> so I've heard from the perfected one.
>
> He has transcended all fetters\
> and escaped from entanglements.\
> Delighting to renounce sensual pleasures,\
> he's freed like lustrous gold from stone.
>
> That giant outshines all,\
> like the Himalaya beside other mountains.\
> Of all those named 'giant',\
> he is truly named, supreme.
>
> I shall extol the giant for you,\
> for he does nothing monstrous.\
> Sweetness and harmlessness\
> are two feet of the giant.
>
> Fervor and celibacy\
> are his two other feet.\
> Faith is the giant's trunk,\
> and equanimity his white tusks.
>
> Mindfulness is his neck, his head is wisdom---\
> inquiry and thinking about principles.\
> His belly is the sacred hearth of the Dhamma,\
> and his tail is seclusion.
>
> Practicing absorption, enjoying the breath,\
> he is serene within.\
> The giant is serene when walking,\
> the giant is serene when standing,
>
> the giant is serene when lying down,\
> and when sitting, the giant is serene.\
> The giant is restrained everywhere:\
> this is the accomplishment of the giant.
>
> He eats blameless things,\
> he doesn't eat blameworthy things.\
> When he gets food and clothes,\
> he avoids storing them up.
>
> Having severed all bonds,\
> fetters large and small,\
> wherever he goes,\
> he goes without concern.
>
> A white lotus,\
> fragrant and delightful,\
> sprouts in water and grows there,\
> but water does not stick to it.
>
> Just so the Buddha is born in the world,\
> and lives in the world,\
> but the world does not stick to him,\
> as water does not stick to the lotus.
>
> A great blazing fire\
> dies down when the fuel runs out.\
> When the coals have gone out\
> it's said to be 'quenched'.
>
> This simile is taught by the discerning\
> to express the meaning clearly.\
> Great giants will understand\
> what the giant taught the giant.
>
> Free of greed, free of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled;\
> the giant, giving up his body,\
> being undefiled, will be fully quenched."

</article>
<article id="an6.44">

#### [AN 6.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Migasālā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Migasālāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of the laywoman Migasālā, where he sat on the
seat spread out.

Then the laywoman Migasālā went up to Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Honorable Ānanda, how on earth are we supposed
to understand the teaching taught by the Buddha, when the chaste and the
unchaste are both reborn in exactly the same place in the next life?

My father Purāṇa was celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of
sex. When he passed away the Buddha declared that, since he was a
once-returner, he was reborn in the host of joyful gods.

But my uncle Isidatta was not celibate; he lived content with his wife.
When he passed away the Buddha declared that, since he was also a
once-returner, he was reborn in the host of joyful gods.

How on earth are we supposed to understand the teaching taught by the
Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both reborn in exactly the
same place in the next life?"

"You're right, sister, but that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Ānanda, after receiving almsfood at Migasālā's home, rose from his
seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from almsround, Ānanda
went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had
happened.

"Ānanda, who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty,
with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals?
These six people are found in the world. What six?

Take a certain person who is sweet-natured and pleasant to be with. And
spiritual companions enjoy living together with them. And they've not
listened or learned or comprehended theoretically or found even
temporary freedom. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're going to a lower place,
not a higher.

Take another person who is sweet-natured and pleasant to be with. And
spiritual companions enjoy living together with them. And they've
listened and learned and comprehended theoretically and found temporary
freedom. When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a
higher place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is sweet-natured ... and has listened,
learned, comprehended theoretically, and found temporary freedom is
better and finer than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream
of the teaching carries them along. But who knows the difference between
them except a Realized One?

So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass judgment on
people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves. I, or someone
like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has greedy thoughts. And they've not listened or learned or comprehended
theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're
going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has greedy thoughts. ... Because the stream of the teaching carries them
along. ... When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a
higher place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ...

I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has the impulse to speak inappropriately. And they've not listened or
learned or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower
place, not a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has the impulse to speak inappropriately. But they've listened and
learned and comprehended theoretically and found temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is angry and conceited, but has listened,
learned, comprehended theoretically, and found temporary freedom is
better and finer than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream
of the teaching carries them along. But who knows the difference between
them except a Realized One?

So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass judgment on
people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves. I, or someone
like me, may pass judgment on people.

Who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty, with an
aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals? These
six people are found in the world.

If Isidatta had achieved Purāṇa's level of ethical conduct, Purāṇa could
not have even known Isidatta's destination. And if Purāṇa had achieved
Isidatta's level of wisdom, Isidatta could not have even known Purāṇa's
destination. So both individuals were lacking in one respect."

</article>
<article id="an6.45">

#### [AN 6.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Debt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Iṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, isn't poverty suffering in the world for a person who
enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor, penniless person falls into debt, isn't being in debt also
suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person who has fallen into debt agrees to pay interest,
isn't the interest also suffering in the world for a person who enjoys
sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person who has fallen into debt and agreed to pay interest
fails to pay it when it falls due, they get a warning. Isn't being
warned suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual
pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person fails to pay after getting a warning, they're
prosecuted. Isn't being prosecuted suffering in the world for a person
who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person fails to pay after being prosecuted, they're
imprisoned. Isn't being imprisoned suffering in the world for a person
who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"So mendicants, poverty, debt, interest, warnings, prosecution, and
imprisonment are suffering in the world for those who enjoy sensual
pleasures. In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities is called poor
and penniless in the training of the Noble One.

Since they have no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, or wisdom when
it comes to skillful qualities, they do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. This is how they're in debt, I say.

In order to conceal the bad things they do by way of body, speech, and
mind they harbor corrupt wishes. They wish, plan, speak, and act with
the thought: 'May no-one find me out!' This is how they pay interest, I
say.

Good-hearted spiritual companions say this about them: 'This venerable
acts like this, and behaves like that.' This is how they're warned, I
say.

When they go to a wilderness, the root of a tree, or an empty hut,
they're beset by remorseful, unskillful thoughts. This is how they're
prosecuted, I say.

That poor, penniless person has done bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're trapped in the
prison of hell or the animal realm. I don't see a single prison that's
as brutal, as vicious, and such an obstacle to reaching the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke as the prison of hell or the animal realm.

> Poverty is said to be suffering in the world,\
> and so is being in debt.\
> A poor person who has fallen into debt\
> frets even when spending the loan.
>
> And then they're prosecuted,\
> or even thrown in jail.\
> Such imprisonment is true suffering\
> for someone who prays for pleasure and possessions.
>
> In the same way, in the noble one's training\
> whoever has no faith,\
> no conscience or prudence,\
> contemplates bad deeds.
>
> After doing bad things\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> they wish, 'May no-one find me out!'
>
> Their behavior is creepy\
> by body, speech, and mind.\
> They pile up bad deeds\
> on and on, life after life.
>
> That stupid evildoer,\
> knowing their own misdeeds,\
> is a poor person who has fallen into debt,\
> and frets even when spending the loan.
>
> And when in village or wilderness\
> they're prosecuted\
> by painful mental plans,\
> which are born of remorse.
>
> That stupid evildoer,\
> knowing their own misdeeds,\
> goes to one of the animal realms,\
> or is trapped in hell.
>
> Such imprisonment is true suffering,\
> from which a wise one is released.\
> With confident heart, they give\
> with wealth that is properly earned.
>
> That faithful householder\
> holds a perfect hand on both counts:\
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity.
>
> In the same way, in the noble one's training,\
> whoever is grounded in faith,\
> with conscience and prudence,\
> wise, and ethically restrained,
>
> is said to live happily\
> in the noble one's training.\
> After gaining pleasure not of the flesh,\
> they concentrate on equanimity.
>
> They give up the five hindrances,\
> constantly energetic,\
> and enter the absorptions,\
> unified, alert, and mindful.
>
> Truly knowing in this way\
> the end of all fetters,\
> by not grasping in any way,\
> their mind is rightly freed.
>
> To that unaffected one, rightly freed\
> with the end of the fetters of continued existence,\
> the knowledge comes:\
> 'My freedom is unshakable.'
>
> This is the ultimate knowledge.\
> This is the supreme happiness.\
> Sorrowless, stainless, secure:\
> this is the highest freedom from debt."

</article>
<article id="an6.46">

#### [AN 6.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [By Mahācunda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahācundasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time Venerable Mahācunda was staying in
the land of the Cetis at Sahajāti. There he addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahācunda said this:

"Take a case where mendicants who practice discernment of principles
rebuke mendicants who practice absorption meditation: 'They say, "We
practice absorption meditation! We practice absorption meditation!" And
they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. Why do they
practice absorption meditation? In what way do they practice absorption
meditation? How do they practice absorption meditation?' In this case
the mendicants who practice discernment of principles are not inspired,
and the mendicants who practice absorption meditation are not inspired.
And they're not acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for
the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

Now, take a case where mendicants who practice absorption meditation
rebuke mendicants who practice discernment of principles: 'They say, "We
practice discernment of principles! We practice discernment of
principles!" But they're restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous,
loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion,
with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. Why do they practice
discernment of principles? In what way do they practice discernment of
principles? How do they practice discernment of principles?' In this
case the mendicants who practice absorption meditation are not inspired,
and the mendicants who practice discernment of principles are not
inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare and happiness of the
people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.

Now, take a case where mendicants who practice discernment of principles
praise only others like them, not mendicants who practice absorption
meditation. In this case the mendicants who practice discernment of
principles are not inspired, and the mendicants who practice absorption
meditation are not inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

And take a case where mendicants who practice absorption meditation
praise only others like them, not mendicants who practice discernment of
principles. In this case the mendicants who practice absorption
meditation are not inspired, and the mendicants who practice discernment
of principles are not inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare
and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans.

So you should train like this: 'As mendicants who practice discernment
of principles, we will praise mendicants who practice absorption
meditation.' That's how you should train. Why is that? Because it's
incredibly rare to find individuals in the world who have direct
meditative experience of the element free of death.

So you should train like this: 'As mendicants who practice absorption
meditation, we will praise mendicants who practice discernment of
principles.' That's how you should train. Why is that? Because it's
incredibly rare to find individuals in the world who see the meaning of
a deep saying with penetrating wisdom."

</article>
<article id="an6.47">

#### [AN 6.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Apparent the Present Life (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasandiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then the wanderer Moḷiyasīvaka went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'. In what
way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves?"

"Well then, Sīvaka, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, Sīvaka? When there's greed in
you, do you understand 'I have greed in me'? And when there's no greed
in you, do you understand 'I have no greed in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves.

What do you think, Sīvaka? When there's hate ... delusion ... greedy
ideas ... hateful ideas ... When there are delusional ideas in you, do
you understand 'I have delusional ideas in me'? And when there are no
delusional ideas in you, do you understand 'I have no delusional ideas
in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, sir! Excellent! From this day forth, may the Buddha remember
me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an6.48">

#### [AN 6.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Apparent in the Present Life (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasandiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? When there's greed in
you, do you understand 'I have greed in me'? And when there's no greed
in you, do you understand 'I have no greed in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves.

What do you think, brahmin? When there's hate ... delusion ...
corruption that leads to physical deeds ... corruption that leads to
speech ... When there's corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do
you understand 'I have corruption that leads to mental deeds in me'? And
when there's no corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do you
understand 'I have no corruption that leads to mental deeds in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an6.49">

#### [AN 6.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Khema ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khemasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Khema and Venerable Sumana were staying near
Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. Then they went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. Venerable Khema said to the Buddha:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---does
not think: 'There is someone better than me, or equal to me, or worse
than me.'"

That is what Khema said, and the teacher approved. Then Khema, knowing
that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

And then, not long after Khema had left, Sumana said to the Buddha:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---does
not think: 'There is no-one better than me, or equal to me, or worse
than me.'"

That is what Sumana said, and the teacher approved. Then Sumana, knowing
that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

And then, soon after Khema and Sumana had left, the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, this is how gentlemen declare enlightenment.
The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved. But it seems that
there are some futile men here who declare enlightenment as a joke.
Later they will fall into anguish.

> They don't represent themselves\
> as being among superiors, inferiors, or equals.\
> Rebirth is ended, `<j>`{=html}the spiritual journey has been
> completed. `</j>`{=html}\
> They live freed from fetters."

</article>
<article id="an6.50">

#### [AN 6.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sense Restraint ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Indriyasaṁvarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. ... One
who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom.

When there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled sense restraint has
fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. When there is ethical
conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled
sense restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. ...
One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an6.51">

#### [AN 6.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, how does a mendicant get to hear a teaching they
haven't heard before? How do they remember those teachings they have
heard? How do they keep exercising the teachings with which they are
already familiar? And how do they come to understand what they haven't
understood before?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverend Sāriputta, take a mendicant who memorizes the
teaching---statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses,
inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories,
and elaborations.

Then, just as they learned and memorized it, they teach others in
detail, make them recite in detail, practice reciting in detail, and
think about and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with
the mind.

They enter the rains retreat in a monastery with senior mendicants who
are very learned, inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the
teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines. From time to time they go
up to those mendicants and ask them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say
this? What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear,
reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful
matters.

This is how a mendicant gets to hear a teaching they haven't heard
before. It's how they remember those teachings they have heard. It's how
they keep exercising the teachings with which they are already familiar.
And it's how they come to understand what they haven't understood
before."

"It's incredible, reverend, it's amazing! How well said this was by
Venerable Ānanda! And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who
has these six qualities.

For Ānanda memorizes the teaching ... statements, mixed prose & verse,
discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past
lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. Those venerables clarify to
Ānanda what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt
regarding the many doubtful matters."

</article>
<article id="an6.52">

#### [AN 6.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Aristocrats ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khattiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Aristocrats, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Aristocrats, brahmin, have wealth as their ambition. They're
preoccupied with wisdom. They're fixated on power. They insist on
territory. Their ultimate goal is authority."

"Brahmins, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Brahmins have wealth as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
wisdom. They're fixated on the hymns. They insist on sacrifice. Their
ultimate goal is the Brahmā realm."

"Householders, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Householders have wealth as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
wisdom. They're fixated on their profession. They insist on work. Their
ultimate goal is to complete their work."

"Women, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Women have a man as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
adornments. They're fixated on their children. They insist on being
without a co-wife. Their ultimate goal is authority."

"Bandits, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Bandits have theft as their ambition. They're preoccupied with a hiding
place. They're fixated on their sword. They insist on darkness. Their
ultimate goal is invisibility."

"Ascetics, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Ascetics have patience and sweetness as their ambition. They're
preoccupied with wisdom. They're fixated on ethical conduct. They insist
on owning nothing. Their ultimate goal is extinguishment."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Mister Gotama knows the
ambition, preoccupation, fixation, insistence, and ultimate goal of
aristocrats, brahmins, householders, women, bandits, and ascetics.
Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an6.53">

#### [AN 6.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Diligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appamādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come?"

"There is, brahmin."

"So what is it?"

"Diligence, brahmin, is one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
secures benefits for both the present life and lives to come.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint. So an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and
cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to
come.

The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and
meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In
the same way, diligence is one thing ...

A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes
them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. In the same way,
diligence is one thing ...

When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to
the stalk will follow along. In the same way, diligence is one thing ...

All lesser rulers are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the
same way, diligence is one thing ...

The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and
cultivated, secures benefits for both the present life and lives to
come.

This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures
benefits for both the present life and lives to come."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>
<article id="an6.54">

#### [AN 6.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Dhammika ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.

Now at that time Venerable Dhammika was a resident in all seven
monasteries of his native land. There he abused visiting mendicants; he
insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed them. The visiting mendicants
who were treated in this way did not stay. They left, abandoning the
monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "We have supplied
the mendicant Saṅgha with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. But the visiting mendicants don't stay. They
leave, abandoning the monastery. What is the cause, what is the reason
for this?"

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "This Venerable
Dhammika abuses visiting mendicants; he insults, harms, attacks, and
harasses them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way do
not stay. They leave, abandoning the monastery. Why don't we banish
Venerable Dhammika?"

Then the local lay followers went up to Venerable Dhammika and said to
him, "Sir, please leave this monastery. You've stayed here long enough."

Then Venerable Dhammika left and went to another monastery. There he
abused visiting mendicants; he insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed
them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way did not stay.
They left, abandoning the monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves: ...

They said to Venerable Dhammika, "Sir, please leave this monastery.
You've stayed here long enough."

Then Venerable Dhammika left and went to another monastery. There he
abused visiting mendicants; he insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed
them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way did not stay.
They left, abandoning the monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "Why don't we banish
Venerable Dhammika from all seven monasteries in our native land?"

Then the local lay followers went up to Venerable Dhammika and said to
him, "Sir, please leave all seven monasteries in our native land."

Then Venerable Dhammika thought, "I've been banished by the local lay
followers from all seven monasteries in my native land. Where am I to go
now?" He thought, "Why don't I go to see the Buddha?"

Then Venerable Dhammika took his bowl and robe and set out for Rājagaha.
Eventually he came to Rājagaha and the Vulture's Peak. He went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "So,
Brahmin Dhammika, where have you come from?"

"Sir, I've been banished by the local lay followers from all seven
monasteries in my native land."

"Enough, Brahmin Dhammika, what's that to you? Now that you've been
banished from all of those places, you have come to me.

Once upon a time, some sea-merchants set sail for the ocean deeps,
taking with them a land-spotting bird. When their ship was out of sight
of land, they released the bird. It flew right away to the east, the
west, the north, the south, upwards, and in-between. If it saw land on
any side, it went there and stayed. But if it saw no land on any side it
returned to the ship. In the same way, now that you've been banished
from all of those places, you have come to me.

Once upon a time, King Koravya had a royal banyan tree with five trunks
called 'Well Planted'. It was shady and lovely. Its canopy spread over
twelve leagues, while the network of roots spread for five leagues. Its
fruits were as large as a rice pot. And they were as sweet as pure wild
honey. The king and harem made use of one trunk, the troops another, the
people of town and country another, ascetics and brahmins another, and
beasts and birds another. No-one guarded the fruit, yet no-one damaged
another's fruits.

Then a certain person ate as much as he liked of the fruit, then broke
off a branch and left. Then the deity haunting the royal banyan tree
thought, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! How wicked this person is, to
eat as much as they like, then break off a branch and leave! Why don't I
make sure that the royal banyan tree gives no fruit in future?' Then the
royal banyan tree gave no more fruit.

Then King Koravya went up to Sakka, lord of gods, and said to him,
'Please sir, you should know that the royal banyan tree called Well
Planted gives no fruit.' Then Sakka used his psychic powers to will that
a violent storm come. And it felled and uprooted the royal banyan tree.
Then the deity haunting the tree stood to one side, miserable and sad,
weeping, with a tearful face.

Then Sakka went up to that deity, and said, 'Why, god, are you standing
to one side, miserable and sad, weeping, with a tearful face?'

'Because, my good sir, a violent storm came and felled and uprooted my
home.'

'Well, did you stand by your tree's duty when the storm came?'

'But my good sir, how does a tree stand by its duty?'

'It's when those who need the tree's roots, bark, leaves, flowers, or
fruit take what they need. Yet the deity is not displeased or upset
because of this. This is how a tree stands by its duty.'

'I was not standing by a tree's duty when the storm came and felled and
uprooted my home.'

'God, if you were to stand by a tree's duty, your home may be as it was
before.'

'I will stand by a tree's duty! May my home be as it was before!'

Then Sakka used his psychic power to will that a violent storm come. And
it raised up that mighty banyan tree and the bark of the roots was
healed.

In the same way, Brahmin Dhammika, were you standing by an ascetic's
duty when the local lay followers banished you from all seven of the
monasteries in your native land?"

"But sir, how do I stand by an ascetic's duty?"

"When someone abuses, annoys, or argues with an ascetic, the ascetic
doesn't abuse, annoy, or argue back at them. That's how an ascetic
stands by an ascetic's duty."

"I was not standing by an ascetic's duty when the local lay followers
banished me from all seven of the monasteries in my native land."

"Once upon a time, there was a Teacher called Sunetta. He was a
religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had
many hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in the
company of Brahmā. Those lacking confidence in Sunetta were---when their
body broke up, after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. Those full of confidence in Sunetta were---when their
body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

Once upon a time there was a teacher called Mūgapakkha ... Aranemi ...
Kuddālaka ... Hatthipāla ... Jotipāla. He was a religious founder and
was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had many hundreds of
disciples. He taught them the way to rebirth in the company of Brahmā.
Those lacking confidence in Jotipāla were---when their body broke up,
after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. Those full of confidence in Jotipāla were---when their body broke
up, after death---reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

What do you think, Brahmin Dhammika? If someone with malicious intent
were to abuse and insult these six teachers with their hundreds of
followers, would they not create much wickedness?"

"Yes, sir."

"They would indeed. But someone who abuses and insults a single person
accomplished in view with malicious intent creates even more wickedness.
Why is that? Brahmin Dhammika, I say that any injury done by those
outside of the Buddhist community does not compare with what is done to
one's own spiritual companions. So you should train like this: 'We will
have no malicious intent for those who we want to have as our spiritual
companions.' That is how you should train.

> Sunetta and Mūgapakkha,\
> and Aranemi the brahmin,\
> Hatthipāla the student,\
> and Kuddālaka were Teachers.
>
> And Jotipāla Govinda\
> was priest for seven kings.\
> These six famous teachers,\
> harmless ones of the past,
>
> were free of putrefaction, compassionate,\
> gone beyond the fetter of sensuality.\
> Detached from sensual desire,\
> they were reborn in the Brahmā realm.
>
> Many hundreds of\
> their disciples were also\
> free of putrefaction-stench, compassionate,\
> gone beyond the fetter of sensuality.\
> Detached from sensual desire,\
> they were reborn in the Brahmā realm.
>
> One who insults\
> with malicious intent\
> these non-Buddhist seers,\
> free of desire, immersed in samādhi;\
> such a man\
> creates much wickedness.
>
> But one who insults\
> with malicious intent\
> a single person accomplished in view,\
> a mendicant disciple of the Buddha;\
> that man\
> creates even more wickedness.
>
> You shouldn't attack a holy person,\
> who has given up the grounds for views.\
> This person is called\
> the seventh of the noble Saṅgha.
>
> They're not free of desire for sensual pleasures,\
> and their faculties are still immature:\
> faith, mindfulness, and energy,\
> serenity and discernment.
>
> If you attack such a mendicant,\
> you first hurt yourself.\
> Having hurt yourself,\
> you harm the other.
>
> But if you protect yourself,\
> the other is also protected.\
> So you should protect yourself.\
> An astute person is always uninjured."

</article>

[]{#an6-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an6-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an6-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Great Chapter {#an6-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an6-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.55">

#### [AN 6.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Soṇa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time Venerable Soṇa was staying near Rājagaha in the Cool
Grove. Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind,
"I am one of the Buddha's most energetic disciples. Yet my mind is not
freed from defilements by not grasping. But my family has wealth. I
could enjoy that wealth and make merit. Why don't I resign the training
and return to a lesser life, so I can enjoy my wealth and make merit?"

Then the Buddha knew what Venerable Soṇa was thinking. As easily as a
strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the
Vulture's Peak and reappeared in the Cool Grove in front of Soṇa, and
sat on the seat spread out. Soṇa bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one
side.

The Buddha said to him, "Soṇa, as you were in private retreat didn't
this thought come to your mind: 'I am one of the Buddha's most energetic
disciples. Yet my mind is not freed from defilements by not grasping.
But my family has wealth. I could enjoy that wealth and make merit. Why
don't I resign the training and return to a lesser life, so I can enjoy
my wealth and make merit?'"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Soṇa? When you were still a layman, weren't you a
good player of the arched harp?"

"Yes, sir."

"When your harp's strings were tuned too tight, was it resonant and
playable?"

"No, sir."

"When your harp's strings were tuned too slack, was it resonant and
playable?"

"No, sir."

"But when your harp's strings were tuned neither too tight nor too
slack, but fixed at an even tension, was it resonant and playable?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, Soṇa, when energy is too forceful it leads to
restlessness. When energy is too slack it leads to laziness. So, Soṇa,
you should focus on energy and serenity, find a balance of the
faculties, and learn the pattern of this situation."

"Yes, sir," Soṇa replied.

After advising Soṇa like this, the Buddha, as easily as a strong person
would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Cool Grove and
reappeared on the Vulture's Peak.

After some time Soṇa focused on energy and serenity, found a balance of
the faculties, and learned the pattern of this situation. Then Soṇa,
living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the
supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived
having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Soṇa became one of the perfected.

Then, when Soṇa had attained perfection, he thought, "Why don't I go to
the Buddha and declare my enlightenment in his presence?" Then Soṇa went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---is
dedicated to six things. They are dedicated to renunciation, seclusion,
kindness, the ending of craving, the ending of grasping, and mental
clarity.

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to renunciation solely out of mere faith.' But it
should not be seen like this. A mendicant with defilements ended does
not see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs
improvement. They're dedicated to renunciation because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to seclusion because they enjoy possessions,
honor, and popularity.' But it should not be seen like this. ...

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to kindness because they believe that adhering to
precepts and observances is essential.' But it should not be seen like
this. ...

They're dedicated to the ending of craving because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

They're dedicated to the ending of grasping because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

They're dedicated to clarity of mind because they're free of greed,
hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

When a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if compelling
sights come into the range of vision they don't overcome their mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance. Even if compelling sounds ... smells ... tastes ...
touches ... and ideas come into the range of the mind they don't
overcome the mind. The mind remains untainted. It is steady,
imperturbable, observing disappearance.

Suppose there was a mountain that was one solid mass of rock, without
cracks or holes. Even if violent storms were to blow up out of the east,
the west, the north, and the south, they couldn't make it shake or rock
or tremble.

In the same way, when a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this,
even if compelling sights come into the range of vision they don't
overcome their mind. ... The mind remains untainted. It is steady,
imperturbable, observing disappearance.

> When you're dedicated to renunciation\
> and seclusion of the heart;\
> when you're dedicated to kindness\
> and the end of grasping;
>
> when you're dedicated to the ending of craving\
> and clarity of heart;\
> and you've seen the arising of the senses,\
> your mind is rightly freed.
>
> For that one, rightly freed,\
> a mendicant with peaceful mind,\
> there's nothing to be improved,\
> and nothing more to do.
>
> As the wind cannot stir\
> a solid mass of rock,\
> so too sights, tastes, sounds,\
> smells, and touches---the lot---
>
> and ideas, whether liked or disliked,\
> don't disturb the unaffected one.\
> Their mind is steady and free\
> as they observe disappearance."

</article>
<article id="an6.56">

#### [AN 6.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Phagguna ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Phaggunasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Now at that time Venerable Phagguna was sick, suffering, gravely ill.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Phagguna is sick. Sir, please go to Venerable Phagguna
out of sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
Venerable Phagguna. Venerable Phagguna saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance and tried to rise on his cot.

The Buddha said to him, "It's all right, Phagguna, don't get up. There
are some seats spread out by others, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said to Venerable Phagguna: "I hope
you're keeping well, Phagguna; I hope you're all right. And I hope the
pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its
growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.

The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong man
drilling into my head with a sharp point. I'm not keeping well.

The pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening
a tough leather strap around my head. I'm not keeping well.

The winds slicing my belly are so severe, like a deft butcher or their
apprentice were slicing open a cows's belly with a sharp meat cleaver.
I'm not keeping well.

The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like two strong men
grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of
glowing coals. I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is
terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its
fading."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Venerable
Phagguna with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and
left.

Not long after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguna passed away. At the
time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear. Then Venerable
Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguna died. At the
time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear."

"And why shouldn't his faculties be bright and clear? The mendicant
Phagguna's mind was not freed from the five lower fetters. But when he
heard that teaching his mind was freed from them.

Ānanda, there are these six benefits to hearing the teaching at the
right time and examining the meaning at the right time. What six?

Firstly, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is not freed from the
five lower fetters. At the time of death they get to see the Realized
One. The Realized One proclaims a teaching to them that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. When they hear that teaching their mind is freed from the five
lower fetters. This is the first benefit of listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from
the five lower fetters. At the time of death they don't get to see the
Realized One, but they get to see a Realized One's disciple. The
Realized One's disciple teaches them Dhamma ... When they hear that
teaching their mind is freed from the five lower fetters. This is the
second benefit of listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from
the five lower fetters. At the time of death they don't get to see the
Realized One, or to see a Realized One's disciple. But they think about
and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as
they learned and memorized it. As they do so their mind is freed from
the five lower fetters. This is the third benefit of listening to the
teaching.

Next, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is freed from the five
lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At the
time of death they get to see the Realized One. The Realized One teaches
them Dhamma ... When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with
the supreme ending of attachments. This is the fourth benefit of
listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the
five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At
the time of death they don't get to see the Realized One, but they get
to see a Realized One's disciple. The Realized One's disciple teaches
them Dhamma ... When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with
the supreme ending of attachments. This is the fifth benefit of
listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the
five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At
the time of death they don't get to see the Realized One, or to see a
Realized One's disciple. But they think about and consider the teaching
in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. As they do so their mind is freed with the supreme ending of
attachments. This is the sixth benefit of listening to the teaching.

These are the six benefits to hearing the teaching at the right time and
examining the meaning at the right time."

</article>
<article id="an6.57">

#### [AN 6.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Six Classes of Rebirth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chaḷabhijātisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa describes six classes of rebirth: black, blue, red,
yellow, white, and ultimate white.

The black class of rebirth consists of slaughterers of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, hunters or fishers, bandits, executioners, butchers of
cattle, jailers, and any others with a cruel livelihood.

The blue class of rebirth consists of mendicants whose life is thorny,
and any others who teach the efficacy of deeds and action.

The red class of rebirth consists of the Jain ascetics who wear one
cloth.

The yellow class of rebirth consists of the lay people dressed in white
who are disciples of the naked ascetics.

The white class of rebirth consists of male and female Ājīvaka ascetics.

And the ultimate white class of rebirth consists of Nanda Vaccha, Kisa
Saṅkicca, and the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla.

These are the six classes of rebirth that Pūraṇa Kassapa describes."

"But Ānanda, did the whole world authorize Pūraṇa Kassapa to describe
these six classes of rebirth?"

"No, sir."

"It's as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person,
telling them, 'Eat this meat and pay for it!' In the same way, Pūraṇa
Kassapa has described these six classes of rebirth without the consent
of those ascetics and brahmins. And he has done so in a foolish,
incompetent, unskilled way, lacking common sense.

I, however, also describe six classes of rebirth. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, Ānanda, are the six classes of rebirth? Someone born into a
dark class gives rise to a dark result. Someone born into a dark class
gives rise to a bright result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise
to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. Someone born into a
bright class gives rise to a dark result. Someone born into a bright
class gives rise to a bright result. Someone born into a bright class
gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a dark result?
It's when someone is reborn in a low family---a family of
corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters, chariot-makers, or
scavengers---poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is tough, and
food and shelter are hard to find. And they're ugly, unsightly,
deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or half-paralyzed. They
don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting. And they do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. That's how someone born into a dark class gives rise
to a dark result.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a bright
result? It's when some person is reborn in a low family ... But they do
good things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's
how someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright result.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to extinguishment,
which is neither dark nor bright? It's when some person is reborn in a
low family ... They shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. They give up the
five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. They
firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
They truly develop the seven awakening factors. And then they give rise
to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. That's how someone
born in a dark class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark
nor bright.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a dark
result? It's when some person is reborn in an eminent family---a
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. And they're attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. They get to have food,
drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed,
house, and lighting. But they do bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. That's how someone born into
a bright class gives rise to a dark result.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright
result? It's when some person is reborn in an eminent family ... And
they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. That's how someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright
result.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright? It's when some person
is reborn in an eminent family ... They shave off their hair and beard,
dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.
They give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. They firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They truly develop the seven awakening factors.
And then they give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor
bright. That's how someone born into a bright class gives rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.

These are the six classes of rebirth."

</article>
<article id="an6.58">

#### [AN 6.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who, by restraint, has given up the defilements that
should be given up by restraint. By using, they've given up the
defilements that should be given up by using. By enduring, they've given
up the defilements that should be given up by enduring. By avoiding,
they've given up the defilements that should be given up by avoiding. By
getting rid, they've given up the defilements that should be given up by
getting rid. By developing, they've given up the defilements that should
be given up by developing.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by restraint? Take
a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, lives restraining the eye
faculty. For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise
in someone who lives without restraint of the eye faculty do not arise
when there is such restraint. Reflecting rationally, they live
restraining the ear faculty ... the nose faculty ... the tongue faculty
... the body faculty ... the mind faculty. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
restraint of the mind faculty do not arise when there is such restraint.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by restraint.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by using? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, makes use of robes: 'Only for the
sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; and for covering up the private
parts.' Reflecting rationally, they make use of almsfood: 'Not for fun,
indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to
avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put
an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will
have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.'
Reflecting rationally, they make use of lodgings: 'Only for the sake of
warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and
to enjoy retreat.' Reflecting rationally, they make use of medicines and
supplies for the sick: 'Only for the sake of warding off the pains of
illness and to promote good health.' For the distressing and feverish
defilements that might arise in someone who lives without using these
things do not arise when they are used. These are called the defilements
that should be given up by using.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by enduring? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, endures cold, heat, hunger, and
thirst. They endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles. They endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And they put up with
physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. For the distressing and feverish defilements that
might arise in someone who lives without enduring these things do not
arise when they are endured. These are called the defilements that
should be given up by enduring.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by avoiding? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, avoids a wild elephant, a wild
horse, a wild ox, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, thorny ground, a pit, a
cliff, a swamp, and a sewer. Reflecting rationally, they avoid sitting
on inappropriate seats, walking in inappropriate neighborhoods, and
mixing with bad friends---whatever sensible spiritual companions would
believe to be a bad setting. For the distressing and feverish
defilements that might arise in someone who lives without avoiding these
things do not arise when they are avoided. These are called the
defilements that should be given up by avoiding.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by getting rid?
Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, doesn't tolerate a sensual,
malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They don't tolerate any
bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
getting rid of these things do not arise when they are gotten rid of.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by getting rid.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by developing? Take
a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, develops the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
developing these things do not arise when they are developed. These are
called the defilements that should be given up by developing.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.59">

#### [AN 6.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Dārukammika ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dārukammikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika
in the brick house.

Then the householder Dārukammika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Householder, I wonder whether
your family gives gifts?"

"It does, sir. Gifts are given to those mendicants who are perfected or
on the path to perfection; they live in the wilderness, eat only
almsfood, and wear rag robes."

"Householder, as a layman enjoying sensual pleasures, living at home
with your children, using sandalwood imported from Kāsi, wearing
garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and accepting gold and currency, it's
hard for you to know who is perfected or on the path to perfection.

If a mendicant living in the wilderness is restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and
immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties, then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant living in the wilderness
is not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but has
established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with
unified mind and restrained faculties, then in this respect they're
praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who lives within a village is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who lives within a village
is not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who eats only almsfood is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who eats only almsfood is
not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who accepts invitations is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who accepts invitations is
not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who wears rag robes is restless ... then in this respect
they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who wears rag robes is not
restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who wears robes offered by householders is restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties, then in this respect they're reprehensible. If
a mendicant who wears robes offered by householders is not restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but has established
mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with unified mind and
restrained faculties, then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

Go ahead, householder, give gifts to the Saṅgha. Your mind will become
bright and clear, and when your body breaks up, after death, you'll be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Sir, from this day forth I will give gifts to the Saṅgha."

</article>
<article id="an6.60">

#### [AN 6.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Hatthisāriputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Hatthisāriputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

Now at that time several senior mendicants, after the meal, on their
return from almsround, sat together in the pavilion talking about the
teachings. Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta interrupted them while they
were talking.

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said to Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta,
"Venerable, please don't interrupt the senior mendicants while they're
talking about the teachings. Wait until the end of the discussion."

When he said this, Citta Hatthisāriputta's companions said to
Mahākoṭṭhita, "Venerable, please don't rebuke Citta Hatthisāriputta. He
is astute, and quite capable of talking about the teachings with the
senior mendicants."

"It's not easy to know this, reverends, for those who don't comprehend
another's mind.

Take a person who is the sweetest of the sweet, the most even-tempered
of the even-tempered, the calmest of the calm, so long as they live
relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion in a teacher's role. But
when they're separated from the Teacher or a spiritual companion in a
teacher's role, they mix closely with monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen;
with rulers and their ministers, and with monastics of other religions
and their disciples. As they mix closely, they become intimate and
loose, spending time chatting, and so lust infects their mind. They
resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose an ox fond of crops was tied up or shut in a pen. Would it be
right to say that that ox will never again invade the crops?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that that ox will
snap the ropes or break out of the pen, and then invade the crops."

"In the same way, take a person who is the sweetest of the sweet ... As
they mix closely, they become intimate and loose, spending time
chatting, and so lust infects their mind. They resign the training and
return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ... enters
and remains in the first absorption. Thinking, 'I get the first
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

Suppose the heavens were raining heavily at the crossroads so that the
dust vanished and mud appeared. Would it be right to say that now dust
will never appear at this crossroad again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that people or
cattle and so on will cross over the crossroad, or that the wind and sun
will evaporate the moisture so that the dust appears again."

"In the same way, take a person who, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures ... enters and remains in the first absorption. Thinking, 'I
get the first absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign
the training and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second absorption.
Thinking, 'I get the second absorption!' they mix closely with monks ...
They resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose there was a large pond not far from a town or village. After the
heavens have rained heavily there, the clams and mussels, and pebbles
and gravel would vanish. Would it be right to say that now the clams and
mussels, and pebbles and gravel will never appear here again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that people or
cattle and so on will drink from the pond, or that the wind and sun will
evaporate it so that the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel
appear again."

"In the same way, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second
absorption. Thinking, 'I get the second absorption!' they mix closely
with monks ... They resign the training and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, with the fading away of rapture ... enters and
remains in the third absorption. Thinking, 'I get the third absorption!'
they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training and return to a
lesser life.

Suppose a person had finished a delicious meal. They'd have no appetite
for leftovers. Would it be right to say that now food will never appeal
to this person again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that other food
won't appeal to that person as long as the nourishment is still present.
But when the nourishment vanishes food will appeal again."

"In the same way, take a person who, with the fading away of rapture ...
enters and remains in the third absorption. Thinking, 'I get the third
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain ... enters and
remains in the fourth absorption. Thinking, 'I get the fourth
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake, unruffled and free of
waves. Would it be right to say that now waves will never appear in this
lake again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that a violent
storm could blow up out of the east, west, north, or south, and stir up
waves in that lake."

"In the same way, take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain ...
enters and remains in the fourth absorption. Thinking, 'I get the fourth
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in
the signless immersion of the heart. Thinking, 'I get the signless
immersion of the heart!' they mix closely with monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen; with rulers and their ministers, and with monastics of other
religions and their disciples. As they mix closely, they become intimate
and loose, spending time chatting, and so lust infects their mind. They
resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose a ruler or their minister, while walking along the road with an
army of four divisions, was to arrive at a forest grove where they set
up camp for the night. There, because of the noise of the elephants,
horses, chariots, soldiers, and the drums, kettledrums, horns, and
cymbals, the chirping of crickets would vanish. Would it be right to say
that now the chirping of crickets will never be heard in this woodland
grove again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that the ruler or
their minister will depart from that woodland grove so that the chirping
of crickets will be heard there again."

"In the same way, take a person who, not focusing on any signs, enters
and remains in the signless immersion of the heart ... They resign the
training and return to a lesser life."

Then after some time Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta resigned the
training and returned to a lesser life. Then the mendicants who were his
companions went up to Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita and said, "Did Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita comprehend Citta Hatthisāriputta's mind and know that he
had gained such and such meditative attainments, yet he would still
resign the training and return to a lesser life? Or did deities tell you
about it?"

"Reverends, I comprehended his mind and knew this. And deities also told
me."

Then the mendicants who were Citta Hatthisāriputta's companions went up
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, Citta
Hatthisāriputta, who had gained such and such meditative attainments,
has still resigned the training and returned to a lesser life."

"Mendicants, soon Citta will remember renunciation."

And not long after Citta Hatthisāriputta shaved off his hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Then Citta Hatthisāriputta, living alone, withdrawn,
diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of
the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta became one of the
perfected.

</article>
<article id="an6.61">

#### [AN 6.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In the Middle ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Majjhesutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several
senior mendicants sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came
up among them, "Reverends, this was said by the Buddha in 'The Way to
the Far Shore', in 'The Questions of Metteyya':

> 'The thoughtful one who has known both ends,\
> and is not stuck in the middle:\
> he is a great man, I declare,\
> he has escaped the seamstress here.'

But what is one end? What's the second end? What's the middle? And who
is the seamstress?" When this was said, one of the mendicants said to
the senior mendicants:

"Contact, reverends, is one end. The origin of contact is the second
end. The cessation of contact is the middle. And craving is the
seamstress, for craving weaves one to being reborn in one state of
existence or another. That's how a mendicant directly knows what should
be directly known and completely understands what should be completely
understood. Knowing and understanding thus they make an end of suffering
in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"The past, reverends, is one end. The future is the second end. The
present is the middle. And craving is the seamstress ... That's how a
mendicant directly knows ... an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Pleasant feeling, reverends, is one end. Painful feeling is the second
end. Neutral feeling is the middle. And craving is the seamstress ...
That's how a mendicant directly knows ... an end of suffering in this
very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Name, reverends, is one end. Form is the second end. Consciousness is
the middle. And craving is the seamstress ... That's how a mendicant
directly knows ... an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"The six interior sense fields, reverends, are one end. The six exterior
sense fields are the second end. Consciousness is the middle. And
craving is the seamstress ... That's how a mendicant directly knows ...
an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Substantial reality, reverends, is one end. The origin of substantial
reality is the second end. The cessation of substantial reality is the
middle. And craving is the seamstress, for craving weaves one to being
reborn in one state of existence or another. That's how a mendicant
directly knows what should be directly known and completely understands
what should be completely understood. Knowing and understanding thus
they make an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Each of us has spoken from the heart. Come, reverends, let's go to the
Buddha, and inform him about this. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," those senior mendicants replied. Then those senior
mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
informed the Buddha of all they had discussed. They asked, "Sir, who has
spoken well?"

"Mendicants, you've all spoken well in a way. However, this is what I
was referring to in 'The Way to the Far Shore', in 'The Questions of
Metteyya' when I said:

> 'The sage has known both ends,\
> and is not stuck in the middle.\
> He is a great man, I declare,\
> he has escaped the seamstress here.'

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Contact, mendicants, is one end. The origin of contact is the second
end. The cessation of contact is the middle. And craving is the
seamstress, for craving weaves one to being reborn in one state of
existence or another. That's how a mendicant directly knows what should
be directly known and completely understands what should be completely
understood. Knowing and understanding thus they make an end of suffering
in this very life."

</article>
<article id="an6.62">

#### [AN 6.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Knowledge of the Faculties of Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Purisindriyañāṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he
arrived at a town of the Kosalans named Daṇḍakappaka. The Buddha left
the road and sat at the root of a tree on the seat spread out. The
mendicants entered Daṇḍakappaka to look for a guest house.

Then Venerable Ānanda together with several mendicants went to the
Aciravati River to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged from the water
he stood in one robe drying his limbs.

Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable Ānanda, and said to him,
"Reverend Ānanda, when the Buddha declared that Devadatta was going to a
place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable, did he
do so after wholeheartedly deliberating, or was this just a way of
speaking?"

"You're right, reverend, that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Ānanda, that mendicant must be junior, recently gone forth, or else a
foolish, incompetent senior mendicant. How on earth can he take
something that I have declared categorically to be ambiguous? I do not
see a single other person about whom I have given such whole-hearted
deliberation before making a declaration as I did in the case of
Devadatta.

As long as I saw even a fraction of a hair's tip of goodness in
Devadatta I did not declare that he was going to a place of loss, to
hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable. But when I saw that
there was not even a fraction of a hair's tip of goodness in Devadatta I
declared that he was going to a place of loss, to hell, there to remain
for an eon, irredeemable.

Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a man's height, full to the brim
with feces, and someone was sunk into it over their head. Then along
comes a person who wants to help make them safe, who wants to lift them
out of that sewer. But circling all around the sewer they couldn't see
even a fraction of a hair's tip of that person that was not smeared with
feces.

In the same way, when I saw that there was not even a fraction of a
hair's tip of goodness in Devadatta I declared that he was going to a
place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable. If you
would all listen, Ānanda, I will analyze the Realized One's knowledges
of the faculties of persons."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
analyze the faculties of persons. The mendicants will listen and
remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand:
'Both skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After
some time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The skillful
qualities of this person have vanished, but the unskillful qualities are
still present. Nevertheless, their skillful root is unbroken, and from
that the skillful will appear. So this person is not liable to decline
in the future.' Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not
weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. They're sown in a
well-prepared, productive field. Wouldn't you know that those seeds
would grow, increase, and mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is not liable to decline in the future ...
This is how another individual is known to the Realized One by
comprehending their mind. And this is how the Realized One knows a
person's faculties by comprehending their mind. And this is how the
Realized One knows the future origination of a person's qualities by
comprehending their mind.

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The unskillful qualities
of this person have vanished, but the skillful qualities are still
present. Nevertheless, their unskillful root is unbroken, and from that
the unskillful will appear. So this person is still liable to decline in
the future.' Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not
weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And they were sown on a broad
rock. Wouldn't you know that those seeds would not grow, increase, and
mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is still liable to decline in the future ...
This is how another individual is known to the Realized One ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'This person has not even a
fraction of a hair's tip of goodness. They have exclusively dark,
unskillful qualities. When their body breaks up, after death, they will
be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.'
Suppose some seeds were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged. They're sown
in a well-prepared, productive field. Wouldn't you know that those seeds
would not grow, increase, and mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... 'This person has not even a fraction of a hair's tip of
goodness. They have exclusively dark, unskillful qualities. When their
body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell.' ..."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, can you
describe three other persons who are counterparts of these three?"

"I can, Ānanda," said the Buddha. "Ānanda, when I've comprehended the
mind of a person, I understand: 'Both skillful and unskillful qualities
are found in this person.' After some time I comprehend their mind and
understand: 'The skillful qualities of this person have vanished, but
the unskillful qualities are still present. Nevertheless, their skillful
root is unbroken, but it's about to be totally destroyed. So this person
is still liable to decline in the future.' Suppose that there were some
burning coals, blazing and glowing. And they were placed on a broad
rock. Wouldn't you know that those coals would not grow, increase, and
spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose it was the late afternoon and the sun was going down.
Wouldn't you know that the light was about to vanish and darkness
appear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose that it's nearly time for the midnight meal. Wouldn't you
know that the light had vanished and the darkness appeared?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is still liable to decline in the future ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The unskillful qualities
of this person have vanished, but the skillful qualities are still
present. Nevertheless, their unskillful root is unbroken, but it's about
to be totally destroyed. So this person is not liable to decline in the
future.' Suppose that there were some burning coals, blazing and
glowing. They were placed on a pile of grass or timber. Wouldn't you
know that those coals would grow, increase, and spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"Suppose it's the crack of dawn and the sun is rising. Wouldn't you know
that the dark will vanish and the light appear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose that it's nearly time for the midday meal. Wouldn't you know
that the dark had vanished and the light appeared?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is not liable to decline in the future ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'This person has not even a
fraction of a hair's tip of unskillful qualities. They have exclusively
bright, blameless qualities. They will become extinguished in this very
life.' Suppose that there were some cool, quenched coals. They were
placed on a pile of grass or timber. Wouldn't you know that those coals
would not grow, increase, and spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... 'This person has not even a fraction of a hair's tip of
unskillful qualities. They have exclusively bright, blameless qualities.
They will become extinguished in this very life.' This is how another
individual is known to the Realized One by comprehending their mind. And
this is how the Realized One knows a person's faculties by comprehending
their mind. And this is how the Realized One knows the future
origination of a person's qualities by comprehending their mind.

And so, Ānanda, of the first three people one is not liable to decline,
one is liable to decline, and one is bound for a place of loss, hell.
And of the second three people, one is liable to decline, one is not
liable to decline, and one is bound to become extinguished."

</article>
<article id="an6.63">

#### [AN 6.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Penetrative ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbedhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you a penetrative exposition of the teaching.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, what is the penetrative exposition of the teaching? Sensual
pleasures should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Deeds should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to their cessation should be known.

Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to its cessation should be known.

'Sensual pleasures should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these five
kinds of sensual stimulation. Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. However, these are not
sensual pleasures. In the training of the Noble One they're called
'kinds of sensual stimulation'.

> Greedy intention is a person's sensual pleasure.\
> The world's pretty things aren't sensual pleasures.\
> Greedy intention is a person's sensual pleasure.\
> The world's pretty things stay just as they are,\
> but a wise one removes desire for them.

And what is the source of sensual pleasures? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of sensual pleasures? The sensual desire for
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches are all different. This is
called the diversity of sensual pleasures.

And what is the result of sensual pleasures? When one who desires
sensual pleasures creates a corresponding incarnation, partaking of
either good or bad deeds---this is called the result of sensual
pleasures.

And what is the cessation of sensual pleasures? When contact ceases,
sensual pleasures cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of
sensual pleasures is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands sensual pleasures in this way---and
understands their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the practice
that leads to their cessation---they understand that this penetrative
spiritual life is the cessation of sensual pleasures. 'Sensual pleasures
should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the
practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these three
feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral.

And what is the source of feelings? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of feelings? There are pleasant feelings of
the flesh, pleasant feelings not of the flesh, painful feelings of the
flesh, painful feelings not of the flesh, neutral feelings of the flesh,
and neutral feelings not of the flesh. This is called the diversity of
feelings.

And what is the result of feelings? When one who feels creates a
corresponding incarnation, partaking of either good or bad deeds---this
is called the result of feelings.

And what is the cessation of feelings? When contact ceases, feelings
cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply
this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands feelings in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
feelings. 'Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these six
perceptions: perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and
ideas.

And what is the source of perceptions? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of perceptions? The perceptions of sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are all different. This is
called the diversity of perceptions.

And what is the result of perceptions? Communication is the result of
perception, I say. You communicate something in whatever manner you
perceive it, saying 'That's what I perceived.' This is called the result
of perceptions.

And what is the cessation of perception? When contact ceases, perception
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is
simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands perception in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
perception. 'Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these three
defilements: the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance.

And what is the source of defilements? Ignorance is the source of
defilements.

And what is the diversity of defilements? There are defilements that
lead to rebirth in hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, the human
world, and the world of the gods. This is called the diversity of
defilements.

And what is the result of defilements? When one who is ignorant creates
a corresponding incarnation, partaking of either good or bad
deeds---this is called the result of defilements.

And what is the cessation of defilements? When ignorance ceases,
defilements cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of
defilements is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands defilements in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
defilements. 'Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Deeds should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? It is intention that I call deeds.
For after making a choice one acts by way of body, speech, and mind.

And what is the source of deeds? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of deeds? There are deeds that lead to rebirth
in hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, the human world, and the
world of the gods. This is called the diversity of deeds.

And what is the result of deeds? The result of deeds is threefold, I
say: in this very life, on rebirth in the next life, or at some later
time. This is called the result of deeds.

And what is the cessation of deeds? When contact ceases, deeds cease.
The practice that leads to the cessation of deeds is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

When a noble disciple understands deeds in this way ... they understand
that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of deeds. 'Deeds
should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the
practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? Rebirth is suffering;
old age is suffering; illness is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; not getting what
you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering.

And what is the source of suffering? Craving is the source of suffering.

And what is the diversity of suffering? There is suffering that is
severe, mild, slow to fade, and quick to fade. This is called the
diversity of suffering.

And what is the result of suffering? It's when someone who is overcome
and overwhelmed by suffering sorrows and wails and laments, beating
their breast and falling into confusion. Or else, overcome by that
suffering, they begin an external search, wondering: 'Who knows one or
two phrases to stop this suffering?' The result of suffering is either
confusion or a search, I say. This is called the result of suffering.

And what is the cessation of suffering? When craving ceases, suffering
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is simply
this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands suffering in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
suffering. 'Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

This is the penetrative exposition of the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an6.64">

#### [AN 6.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion's Roar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the Realized One possesses six powers of a Realized One.
With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. What six?

Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible and
the impossible as impossible. Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull's place,
roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so he
recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since
he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying
on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. These are the six powers of a
Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the
bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the
divine wheel.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible,
the Realized One answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and
present in terms of grounds and causes, the Realized One answers them in
whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the
absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments, the Realized One
answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of recollection of past lives, the Realized One answers them
in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of passing away and rebirth of sentient beings, the Realized
One answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the ending of defilements, the Realized One answers them in
whatever manner he has truly known it.

And I say that true knowledge of the possible as possible and the
impossible as impossible is for those with immersion, not for those
without immersion. And true knowledge of the result of deeds undertaken
in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes is for
those with immersion, not for those without immersion. And true
knowledge of corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the
absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments is for those with
immersion, not for those without immersion. And true knowledge of the
recollection of past lives is for those with immersion, not for those
without immersion. And true knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of
sentient beings is for those with immersion, not for those without
immersion. And true knowledge of the ending of defilements is for those
with immersion, not for those without immersion.

And so, mendicants, immersion is the path. No immersion is the wrong
path."

</article>

[]{#an6-dutiyapannasaka-devatavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Deities {#an6-dutiyapannasaka-devatavagga.xhtml_an6-dutiyapannasaka-devatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.65">

#### [AN 6.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Fruit of Non-Return ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anāgāmiphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize the fruit of
non-return. What six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness,
unmindfulness, and witlessness. Without giving up these six things you
can't realize the fruit of non-return.

After giving up six things you can realize the fruit of non-return. What
six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness, unmindfulness,
and witlessness. After giving up these six things you can realize the
fruit of non-return."

</article>
<article id="an6.66">

#### [AN 6.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perfection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arahattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith,
and negligence. Without giving up these six things you can't realize
perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith, and
negligence. After giving up these six things you can realize
perfection."

</article>
<article id="an6.67">

#### [AN 6.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Friends ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant with bad friends,
companions, and associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and
attending, and following their example, will fulfill the practice
dealing with the supplementary regulations. Without fulfilling the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's impossible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling the practice of a
trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without fulfilling ethics,
it's impossible to give up sensual desire, or desire to be reborn in the
realm of luminous form or in the formless realm.

It's quite possible that a mendicant with good friends, companions, and
associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and attending, and
following their example, will fulfill the practice dealing with the
supplementary regulations. Having fulfilled the practice dealing with
supplementary regulations, it's possible to fulfill the practice of a
trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a trainee, it's possible to
fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's possible to give up
sensual desire, and desire to be reborn in the realm of luminous form
and in the formless realm."

</article>
<article id="an6.68">

#### [AN 6.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Enjoying Company ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgaṇikārāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant who enjoys company
and groups, who loves them and likes to enjoy them, should take pleasure
in being alone in seclusion. Without taking pleasure in being alone in
seclusion, it's impossible to learn the patterns of the mind. Without
learning the patterns of the mind, it's impossible to fulfill right
view. Without fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right
immersion. Without fulfilling right immersion, it's impossible to give
up the fetters. Without giving up the fetters, it's impossible to
realize extinguishment.

It's quite possible that a mendicant who doesn't enjoy company and
groups, who doesn't love them and like to enjoy them, should take
pleasure in being alone in seclusion. For someone who takes pleasure in
being alone in seclusion, it's possible to learn the patterns of the
mind. For someone who learns the patterns of the mind, it's possible to
fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's possible to
fulfill right immersion. Having fulfilled right immersion, it's possible
to give up the fetters. Having given up the fetters, it's possible to
realize extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an6.69">

#### [AN 6.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A God ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devatāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What
six? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the
training; being easy to admonish, and good friendship. These six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's Grove, came to
me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What six? Respect for the
Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training; being easy
to admonish, and good friendship. These six things don't lead to the
decline of a mendicant.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher
and praises such respect. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
such respect to respect the Teacher. And they praise other mendicants
who respect the Teacher at the right time, truthfully and correctly.
They personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the
Saṅgha ... They personally respect the training ... They are personally
easy to admonish ... They personally have good friends, and praise such
friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack good friends to
develop good friendship. And they praise other mendicants who have good
friends at the right time, truthfully and correctly. That's how I
understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher ... They
personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the Saṅgha
... They personally respect the training ... They are personally easy to
admonish ... They personally have good friends, and praise such
friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack good friends to
develop good friendship. And they praise other mendicants who have good
friends at the right time, truthfully and correctly. This is how to
understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

</article>
<article id="an6.70">

#### [AN 6.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant without immersion
that is peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many
kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again;
appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a
rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the
earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying
cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the
hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as
far as the Brahmā realm.

It's impossible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.

It's impossible that they'll understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with their own mind, understanding
mind with greed as 'mind with greed' ... and freed mind as 'freed mind'.

It's impossible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's impossible that with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses
the human, they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according
to their deeds.

It's impossible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

But it's quite possible that a mendicant who has immersion that is
peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many kinds of
psychic power ...

It's possible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds ...

It's possible that they'll understand the minds of other beings ...

It's possible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's possible that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds.

It's possible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements."

</article>
<article id="an6.71">

#### [AN 6.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Capable of Realizing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sakkhibhabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is incapable of realizing
anything that can be realized, since each and every one is within range.
What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't truly understand which qualities
make things worse, which keep things steady, which lead to distinction,
and which lead to penetration. And they don't practice carefully or do
what's suitable. A mendicant with these six qualities is incapable of
realizing anything that can be realized, since each and every one is
within range.

A mendicant with six qualities is capable of realizing anything that can
be realized, since each and every one is within range. What six? It's
when a mendicant truly understands which qualities make things worse,
which keep things steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to
penetration. And they practice carefully and do what's suitable. A
mendicant with these six qualities is capable of realizing anything that
can be realized, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an6.72">

#### [AN 6.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Strength ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities can't attain strength in
immersion. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in entering
immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion, or skilled in emerging
from immersion. And they don't practice carefully and persistently, and
they don't do what's suitable. A mendicant who has these six qualities
can't attain strength in immersion.

A mendicant who has six qualities can attain strength in immersion. What
six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in
remaining in immersion, and skilled in emerging from immersion. And they
practice carefully and persistently, and do what's suitable. A mendicant
who has these six qualities can attain strength in immersion."

</article>
<article id="an6.73">

#### [AN 6.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [First Absorption (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamatajjhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
And the drawbacks of sensual pleasures have not been truly seen clearly
with right wisdom. Without giving up these six qualities you can't enter
and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. And the
drawbacks of sensual pleasures have been truly seen clearly with right
wisdom. After giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in
the first absorption."

</article>
<article id="an6.74">

#### [AN 6.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [First Absorption (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyatajjhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't enter and remain in the first
absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and
sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. After giving up these six
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

</article>

[]{#an6-arahattavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Perfection {#an6-arahattavagga.xhtml_an6-arahattavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.75">

#### [AN 6.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six qualities they live unhappily in
the present life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What six?
Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and
cruel perceptions. When a mendicant has these six qualities they live
unhappily in the present life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and
when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has six qualities they live happily in the present
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What six? Thoughts of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. And perceptions of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. When a mendicant has these
six qualities they live happily in the present life---without distress,
anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect a good rebirth."

</article>
<article id="an6.76">

#### [AN 6.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perfection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arahattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex,
overestimation, obstinacy, and groveling. Without giving up these six
qualities you can't realize perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex, overestimation,
obstinacy, and groveling. After giving up these six things you can
realize perfection."

</article>
<article id="an6.77">

#### [AN 6.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Superhuman States ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uttarimanussadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six qualities you can't realize a
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
What six? Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding
the sense doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't realize a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

But after giving up six qualities you can realize a superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. What six?
Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding the sense
doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. After giving up these six
qualities you can realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones."

</article>
<article id="an6.78">

#### [AN 6.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Joy and Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukhasomanassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six things they're full of joy and
happiness in the present life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements. What six? It's when a mendicant enjoys the
teaching, meditation, giving up, seclusion, kindness, and
non-proliferation. When a mendicant has these six things they're full of
joy and happiness in the present life, and they have laid the groundwork
for ending the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an6.79">

#### [AN 6.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Achievement ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhigamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in profit,
skilled in loss, and skilled in means. They don't generate enthusiasm to
achieve skillful qualities not yet achieved. They don't protect skillful
qualities they have achieved. And they don't try to persevere in the
task. A mendicant who has these six qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired.

A mendicant who has six qualities is able to acquire more skillful
qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in profit, skilled
in loss, and skilled in means. They generate enthusiasm to achieve
skillful qualities not yet achieved. They protect skillful qualities
they have achieved. And they try to persevere in the task. A mendicant
who has these six qualities is able to acquire more skillful qualities
or to increase the skillful qualities they've already acquired."

</article>
<article id="an6.80">

#### [AN 6.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greatness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahantattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities soon acquires great and
abundant good qualities. What six? It's when a mendicant is full of
light, full of practice, full of inspiration, and full of eagerness.
They don't slack off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.
They reach further. A mendicant who has these six qualities soon
acquires great and abundant good qualities."

</article>
<article id="an6.81">

#### [AN 6.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hell (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanirayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they have corrupt wishes and wrong view. Someone with these six
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And they
have few desires and right view. Someone with these six qualities is
raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an6.82">

#### [AN 6.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hell (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanirayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they're greedy and rude. Someone with these six qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And
they're not greedy or rude. Someone with these six qualities is raised
up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an6.83">

#### [AN 6.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Best Thing ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize the best
thing, perfection. What six? It's when a mendicant is faithless,
shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. And they're concerned with
their body and their life. A mendicant with these six qualities can't
realize the best thing, perfection.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize the best thing, perfection.
What six? It's when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
energetic, and wise. And they have no concern for their body and their
life. A mendicant with these six qualities can realize the best thing,
perfection."

</article>
<article id="an6.84">

#### [AN 6.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Day and Night ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rattidivasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six?
It's when a mendicant has many desires---they're frustrated and not
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And they're faithless, unethical, unmindful, and
witless. A mendicant with these six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

A mendicant with six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six? It's when a
mendicant doesn't have many desires---they're not frustrated but content
with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies
for the sick. And they're faithful, ethical, mindful, and wise. A
mendicant with these six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

</article>

[]{#an6-sitivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Coolness {#an6-sitivagga.xhtml_an6-sitivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.85">

#### [AN 6.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Coolness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sītibhāvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize supreme
coolness. What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't keep their mind in
check when they should. They don't exert their mind when they should.
They don't encourage the mind when they should. They don't watch over
the mind with equanimity when they should. They have bad convictions.
They delight in substantial reality. A mendicant with these six
qualities can't realize supreme coolness.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize supreme coolness. What six?
It's when a mendicant keeps their mind in check when they should. They
exert their mind when they should. They encourage the mind when they
should. They watch over the mind with equanimity when they should. They
have excellent convictions. They delight in extinguishment. A mendicant
with these six qualities can realize supreme coolness."

</article>
<article id="an6.86">

#### [AN 6.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Obstacles ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āvaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They're obstructed by deeds, defilements, or
results. And they're faithless, unenthusiastic, and witless. Someone
with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They're not obstructed by deeds, defilements, or results. And they're
faithful, enthusiastic, and wise. Someone with these six qualities is
able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when
listening to the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an6.87">

#### [AN 6.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Murderer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Voropitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They cause a
schism in the Saṅgha. They're witless, dull, and stupid. Someone with
these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They don't murder their mother or father or a perfected one. They don't
maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They don't cause a schism
in the Saṅgha. They're wise, bright, and clever. Someone with these six
qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful
qualities when listening to the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an6.88">

#### [AN 6.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wanting to Listen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sussūsatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the
Realized One is being taught they don't want to listen. They don't
actively listen or try to understand. They learn the incorrect meaning
and reject the correct meaning. They accept views that contradict the
teaching. Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the Realized One is being
taught they want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand.
They learn the correct meaning and reject the incorrect meaning. They
accept views that conform with the teaching. Someone with these six
qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful
qualities when listening to the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an6.89">

#### [AN 6.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Not Giving Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appahāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't become accomplished
in view. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. Without giving up these six things
you can't become accomplished in view.

After giving up six things you can become accomplished in view. What
six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth
in places of loss. After giving up these six things you can become
accomplished in view."

</article>
<article id="an6.90">

#### [AN 6.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Given Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pahīnasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view has given up six things. What
six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth
in places of loss. A person accomplished in view has given up these six
things."

</article>
<article id="an6.91">

#### [AN 6.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Can't Give Rise ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view can't give rise to six
things. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. A person accomplished in view can't
give rise to these six things."

</article>
<article id="an6.92">

#### [AN 6.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Can't Be Done (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't live disrespectful and irreverent toward the
Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, or the training. They can't establish
their belief on unreliable grounds. And they can't generate an eighth
rebirth. These are the six things that can't be done."

</article>
<article id="an6.93">

#### [AN 6.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Can't Be Done (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't take conditions to be permanent. They cannot
take conditions to be happiness. They cannot take anything to be the
self. They can't do deeds with fixed result in the next life. They can't
fall back on purification through boisterous, superstitious rites. They
can't seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of
religious donations. These are the six things that can't be done."

</article>
<article id="an6.94">

#### [AN 6.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Can't Be Done (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They can't maliciously shed the blood of the Realized One. They
can't cause a schism in the Saṅgha. They can't dedicate themselves to
another teacher. These are the six things that can't be done."

</article>
<article id="an6.95">

#### [AN 6.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Things That Can't Be Done (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
are made by oneself, or that they're made by another, or that they're
made by both. Nor can they fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
arise by chance, not made by oneself, by another, or by both. Why is
that? It is because a person accomplished in view has clearly seen
causes and the phenomena that arise from causes. These are the six
things that can't be done."

</article>

[]{#an6-anisamsavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Benefit {#an6-anisamsavagga.xhtml_an6-anisamsavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.96">

#### [AN 6.96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Appearance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pātubhāvasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the appearance of six things is rare in the world. What
six? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A teacher
of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. Rebirth in a
civilized region. Unimpaired sense faculties. Being bright and clever.
Enthusiasm for skillful qualities. The appearance of these six things is
rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an6.97">

#### [AN 6.97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Benefit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānisaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry. What six? You're bound for the true teaching. You're not
liable to decline. You suffer only for a limited period. You have
unshared knowledge. You've clearly seen causes and the phenomena that
arise from causes. These are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry."

</article>
<article id="an6.98">

#### [AN 6.98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Impermanence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aniccasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as permanent to accept views that conform with the teaching.
Without accepting views that conform with the teaching, it's impossible
to enter the sure path. Without entering the sure path, it's impossible
to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or
perfection.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
impermanent to accept views that conform with the teaching. Having
accepted views that conform with the teaching, it's possible to enter
the sure path. Having entered the sure path, it's possible to realize
the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or perfection."

</article>
<article id="an6.99">

#### [AN 6.99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as pleasurable to accept views that agree with the teaching.
... It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
suffering to accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

</article>
<article id="an6.100">

#### [AN 6.100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Not-Self ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as self to accept views that agree with the teaching. ... It's
quite possible for a mendicant who regards all things as not-self to
accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

</article>
<article id="an6.101">

#### [AN 6.101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguished ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards
extinguishment as suffering to accept views that conform with the
teaching. ...

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards extinguishment as
pleasurable to accept views that conform with the teaching. ..."

</article>
<article id="an6.102">

#### [AN 6.102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Transience ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anavatthitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of impermanence in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'All conditions will appear to me as transient.' 'My mind will not
delight anywhere in the world.' 'My mind will rise above the whole
world.' 'My mind will incline to extinguishment.' 'My fetters will be
given up.' 'I will achieve the ultimate goal of the ascetic life.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
impermanence in all conditions without qualification."

</article>
<article id="an6.103">

#### [AN 6.103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With a Drawn Sword ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ukkhittāsikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of suffering in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'Perception of disillusionment will be established in me for all
conditions, like a killer with a drawn sword.' 'My mind will rise above
the whole world.' 'I will see extinguishment as peaceful.' 'My
underlying tendencies will be uprooted.' 'I will fulfill my duty.' 'I
will have served my Teacher with love.' Seeing these six benefits is
quite enough to establish the perception of suffering in all conditions
without qualification."

</article>
<article id="an6.104">

#### [AN 6.104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Not Determined by Anything ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atammayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of not-self in all things without qualification. What six? 'I
will not be determined by anything in the world.' 'My I-making will
stop.' 'My mine-making will stop.' 'I will have unshared knowledge.' 'I
will clearly see causes and the phenomena that arise from causes.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
not-self in all things without qualification."

</article>
<article id="an6.105">

#### [AN 6.105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [States of Existence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should give up these three states of existence. And you
should train in three trainings. What are the three states of existence
you should give up? Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of
luminous form, and the formless realm. These are the three states of
existence you should give up. What are the three trainings you should
train in? The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three trainings you should train in. When a
mendicant has given up these three states of existence and has trained
in these three trainings they're called a mendicant who has cut off
craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has
made an end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an6.106">

#### [AN 6.106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should give up these three cravings and three conceits.
What three cravings should you give up? Craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. These are
the three cravings you should give up. What three conceits should you
give up? Conceit, inferiority complex, and superiority complex. These
are the three conceits you should give up. When a mendicant has given up
these three cravings and these three conceits they're called a mendicant
who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly
comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering."

</article>

[]{#an6-tikavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Triads {#an6-tikavagga.xhtml_an6-tikavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.107">

#### [AN 6.107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and
delusion. These are the three things. To give up these three things you
should develop three things. What three? You should develop the
perception of ugliness to give up greed, love to give up hate, and
wisdom to give up delusion. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.108">

#### [AN 6.108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop good bodily conduct to give up bad bodily conduct, good
verbal conduct to give up bad verbal conduct, and good mental conduct to
give up bad mental conduct. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.109">

#### [AN 6.109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Thoughts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel thoughts. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop thoughts of renunciation to give up sensual thoughts,
thoughts of good will to give up malicious thoughts, and thoughts of
harmlessness to give up cruel thoughts. These are the three things you
should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.110">

#### [AN 6.110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel perceptions. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop perceptions of renunciation to give up sensual
perceptions, perceptions of good will to give up malicious perceptions,
and perceptions of harmlessness to give up cruel perceptions. These are
the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.111">

#### [AN 6.111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhātusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The elements of
sensuality, malice, and cruelty. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop the element of renunciation to give up the element of
sensuality, the element of good will to give up the element of malice,
and the element of harmlessness to give up the element of cruelty. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.112">

#### [AN 6.112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gratification ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The view that
things are gratifying, the view of self, and wrong view. These are the
three things. To give up these three things you should develop three
things. What three? You should develop the perception of impermanence to
give up the view that things are gratifying; the perception of not-self
to give up the view of self; and right view to give up wrong view. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.113">

#### [AN 6.113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Discontent ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aratisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Discontent,
cruelty, and unprincipled conduct. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop rejoicing to give up discontent, harmlessness to give up
cruelty, and principled conduct to give up unprincipled conduct. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.114">

#### [AN 6.114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Contentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Santuṭṭhitāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Lack of
contentment, lack of situational awareness, and having many wishes.
These are the three things. To give up these three things you should
develop three things. What three? You should develop contentment to give
up lack of contentment, situational awareness to give up lack of
situational awareness, and having few wishes to give up having many
wishes. These are the three things you should develop to give up those
three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.115">

#### [AN 6.115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard to Admonish ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dovacassatāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Being hard to
admonish, bad friendship, and a scattered mind. These are the three
things. To give up these three things you should develop three things.
What three? You should develop being easy to admonish to give up being
hard to admonish, good friendship to give up bad friendship, and
mindfulness of breathing to give up a scattered mind. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>
<article id="an6.116">

#### [AN 6.116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Restlessness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uddhaccasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Restlessness,
lack of restraint, and negligence. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop serenity to give up restlessness, restraint to give up
lack of restraint, and diligence to give up negligence. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

</article>

[]{#an6-samannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Ascetic Life {#an6-samannavagga.xhtml_an6-samannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.117">

#### [AN 6.117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing the Body ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāyānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't meditate
observing an aspect of the body. What six? Relishing work, talk, sleep,
and company, not guarding the sense doors, and eating too much. Without
giving up these six qualities you can't meditate observing an aspect of
the body.

But after giving up these six qualities you can meditate observing an
aspect of the body. What six? Relishing work, talk, sleep, and company,
not guarding the sense doors, and eating too much. After giving up these
six qualities you can meditate observing an aspect of the body."

</article>
<article id="an6.118">

#### [AN 6.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Principles, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't meditate observing
an aspect of the body internally ... body externally ... body internally
and externally ... feelings internally ... feelings externally ...
feelings internally and externally ... mind internally ... mind
externally ... mind internally and externally ... principles internally
... principles externally ... principles internally and externally. What
six? Relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, not guarding the sense
doors, and eating too much. After giving up these six qualities you can
meditate observing an aspect of principles internally and externally."

</article>
<article id="an6.119">

#### [AN 6.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Tapussa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tapussasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, having six qualities the householder Tapussa is certain
about the Realized One, sees freedom from death and lives having
realized freedom from death. What six? Experiential confidence in the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and noble ethics, knowledge, and
freedom. Having these six qualities the householder Tapussa is certain
about the Realized One, sees freedom from death and lives having
realized freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an6.120-139">

#### [AN 6.120--139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Bhallika, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhallikādisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, having six qualities the householders Bhallika ... Sudatta
Anāthapiṇḍika ... Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa ... Hatthaka of Āḷavī ...
Mahānāma the Sakyan ... Ugga of Vesālī ... Uggata ... Sūrambaṭṭha ...
Jīvaka Komārabhacca ... Nakula's father ... Tavakaṇṇika ... Pūraṇa ...
Isidatta ... Sandhāna ... Vijaya ... Vijayamāhita ... Meṇḍaka ... the
lay followers Vāseṭṭha ... Ariṭṭha ... and Sāragga are certain about the
Realized One, see freedom from death and live having realized freedom
from death. What six? Experiential confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha, and noble ethics, knowledge, and freedom.
Having these six qualities the lay follower Sāragga is certain about the
Realized One, sees freedom from death and lives having realized freedom
from death."

</article>

[]{#an6-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an6-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an6-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an6.140">

#### [AN 6.140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection. For insight into greed, these six things should be
developed."

</article>
<article id="an6.141">

#### [AN 6.141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, ethics,
generosity, and the deities. For insight into greed, these six things
should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an6.142">

#### [AN 6.142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence,
the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up,
the perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation. For
insight into greed, these six things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an6.143-169">

#### [AN 6.143--169]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of greed these six things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an6.170-649">

#### [AN 6.170--649]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... letting go of negligence these six things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Sixes is finished.

</article>

[]{#an7.xhtml}

# The Book of the Sevens {#an7.xhtml_an7 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an7-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an7-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an7-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Wealth {#an7-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an7-dhanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.1">

#### [AN 7.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Pleasing (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is disliked and
disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What seven? It's when a mendicant desires material things, honor, and to
be looked up to. They lack conscience and prudence. They have corrupt
wishes and wrong view. A mendicant with these seven qualities is
disliked and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or
admired.

A mendicant with seven qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What seven? It's when a
mendicant doesn't desire material things, honor, and to be looked up to.
They have conscience and prudence. They have few desires and right view.
A mendicant with these seven qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an7.2">

#### [AN 7.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Pleasing (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is disliked and
disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What seven? It's when a mendicant desires material things, honor, and to
be looked up to. They lack conscience and prudence. They're jealous and
stingy. A mendicant with these seven qualities is disliked and
disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A mendicant with seven qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What seven? It's when a
mendicant doesn't desire material things, honor, and to be looked up to.
They have conscience and prudence. They're not jealous or stingy. A
mendicant with these seven qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an7.3">

#### [AN 7.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers in Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. ... "Mendicants,
there are these seven powers. What seven? The powers of faith, energy,
conscience, prudence, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the
seven powers.

> The powers are faith and energy,\
> conscience and prudence,\
> mindfulness and immersion,\
> and wisdom as the seventh power.\
> Empowered by these,\
> an astute mendicant lives happily.
>
> They should examine the teaching rationally,\
> discerning the meaning with wisdom.\
> The liberation of their heart\
> is like a lamp going out."

</article>
<article id="an7.4">

#### [AN 7.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers in Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthatabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven powers. What seven? The powers of
faith, energy, conscience, prudence, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of conscience? It's when a noble disciple has a
conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and conscientious about acquiring any bad, unskillful
qualities. This is called the power of conscience.

And what is the power of prudence? It's when a noble disciple is
prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to the acquiring of any bad,
unskillful qualities. This is called the power of prudence.

And what is the power of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the power of
mindfulness.

And what is the power of immersion? It's when a noble disciple, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. ... Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
the power of immersion.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom.

These are the seven powers.

> The powers are faith and energy,\
> conscience and prudence,\
> mindfulness and immersion,\
> and wisdom as the seventh power.\
> Empowered by these,\
> an astute mendicant lives happily.
>
> They should examine the teaching rationally,\
> discerning the meaning with wisdom.\
> The liberation of their heart\
> is like a lamp going out."

</article>
<article id="an7.5">

#### [AN 7.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wealth in Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittadhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven kinds of wealth. What seven? The
wealth of faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and
wisdom. These are the seven kinds of wealth.

> Faith and ethical conduct are kinds of wealth,\
> as are conscience and prudence,\
> learning and generosity,\
> and wisdom is the seventh kind of wealth.
>
> When a woman or man\
> has these kinds of wealth,\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an7.6">

#### [AN 7.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wealth in Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthatadhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven kinds of wealth. What seven? The
wealth of faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.

And what is the wealth of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening ... This is called the wealth of faith.

And what is the wealth of ethical conduct? It's when a noble disciple
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called the wealth of
ethical conduct.

And what is the wealth of conscience? It's when a noble disciple has a
conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful
qualities. This is called the wealth of conscience.

And what is the wealth of prudence? It's when a noble disciple is
prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to the acquiring of any bad,
unskillful qualities. This is called the wealth of prudence.

And what is the wealth of learning? It's when a noble disciple is very
learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These teachings
are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is called the wealth of learning.

And what is the wealth of generosity? It's when a noble disciple lives
at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called the wealth of generosity.

And what is the wealth of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the wealth of wisdom.

These are the seven kinds of wealth.

> Faith and ethical conduct are kinds of wealth,\
> as are conscience and prudence,\
> learning and generosity,\
> and wisdom is the seventh kind of wealth.
>
> When a woman or man\
> has these kinds of wealth,\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an7.7">

#### [AN 7.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ugga ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Ugga the government minister went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing!
Migāra of Rohaṇa is so rich, so very wealthy."

"But Ugga, how rich is he?"

"He has a hundred thousand gold coins, not to mention the silver coins!"

"Well, Ugga, that is wealth, I can't deny it. But fire, water, rulers,
thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share of that wealth. There are
these seven kinds of wealth that they can't take a share of. What seven?
The wealth of faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity,
and wisdom. There are these seven kinds of wealth that fire, water,
rulers, thieves, and unloved heirs can't take a share of.

> Faith and ethical conduct are kinds of wealth,\
> as are conscience and prudence,\
> learning and generosity,\
> and wisdom is the seventh kind of wealth.
>
> When a woman or man\
> has these kinds of wealth,\
> they're really rich in the world,\
> invincible among gods and humans.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an7.8">

#### [AN 7.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁyojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven fetters. What seven? The fetters of
attraction, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance. These are the seven fetters."

</article>
<article id="an7.9">

#### [AN 7.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pahānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
seven fetters. What seven? The fetters of attraction, repulsion, views,
doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. The spiritual life
is lived to give up and cut out these seven fetters. When a mendicant
has given up the fetters of attraction, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance---cut them off at the root,
made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they are unable to
arise in the future---they're called a mendicant who has cut off
craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has
made an end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an7.10">

#### [AN 7.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stinginess ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Macchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven fetters. What seven? The fetters of
attraction, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, jealousy, and stinginess.
These are the seven fetters."

</article>

[]{#an7-anusayavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Tendencies {#an7-anusayavagga.xhtml_an7-anusayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.11">

#### [AN 7.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Underlying Tendencies (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaanusayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven underlying tendencies. What seven?
The underlying tendencies of sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are the seven
underlying tendencies."

</article>
<article id="an7.12">

#### [AN 7.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Underlying Tendencies (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaanusayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
seven underlying tendencies. What seven? The underlying tendencies of
sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn,
and ignorance. The spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
seven underlying tendencies.

When a mendicant has given up the underlying tendencies of sensual
desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance---cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump,
obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future---they're
called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by
rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering."

</article>
<article id="an7.13">

#### [AN 7.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Family ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, visiting a family with seven factors is not worthwhile, or
if you've already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile. What seven?
They don't politely rise, bow, or offer a seat. They hide what they
have. Even when they have much they give little. Even when they have
refined things they give coarse things. They give carelessly, not
carefully. Visiting a family with these seven factors is not worthwhile,
or if you've already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile.

Visiting a family with seven factors is worthwhile, or if you've already
arrived, sitting down is worthwhile. What seven? They politely rise,
bow, and offer a seat. They don't hide what they have. When they have
much they give much. When they have refined things they give refined
things. They give carefully, not carelessly. Visiting a family with
these seven factors is worthwhile, or if you've already arrived, sitting
down is worthwhile."

</article>
<article id="an7.14">

#### [AN 7.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puggalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven? The one freed both ways, the one freed by wisdom, the
direct witness, the one attained to view, the one freed by faith, the
follower of teachings, and the follower by faith. These are the seven
people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an7.15">

#### [AN 7.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Simile With Water ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Udakūpamāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people found in the world are like those in
water.

What seven? One person sinks under once and stays under. One person
rises up then sinks under. One person rises up then stays put. One
person rises up then sees and discerns. One person rises up then crosses
over. One person rises up then finds a footing. One person has risen up,
crossed over, and gone beyond, and that brahmin stands on the shore.

And what kind of person sinks under once and stays under? It's the kind
of person who has exclusively dark, unskillful qualities. This kind of
person sinks under once and stays under.

And what kind of person rises up then sinks under? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' However
their faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom don't last or
grow, but dwindle away. This kind of person rises up then sinks under.

And what kind of person rises up then stays put? It's the kind of person
who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' And their faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom lasts, neither dwindling nor
growing. This kind of person rises up then stays put.

And what kind of person rises up then sees and discerns? It's the kind
of person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. This kind of person rises
up then sees and discerns.

And what kind of person rises up then crosses over? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then
make an end of suffering. This kind of person rises up then crosses
over.

And what kind of person rises up then finds a footing? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
kind of person rises up then finds a footing.

And what kind of person has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a
brahmin who stands on the shore? It's the kind of person who, rising up,
thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' They realize the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This kind of person has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a
brahmin who stands on the shore.

These seven people found in the world are like those in water."

</article>
<article id="an7.16">

#### [AN 7.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Impermanence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aniccānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
first person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly
the same time. This is the second person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished between one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

</article>
<article id="an7.17">

#### [AN 7.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven? First, take a person who meditates observing
suffering in all conditions. They perceive suffering and experience
suffering. Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply
the mind and fathom with wisdom. ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.18">

#### [AN 7.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Not-self ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anattānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"First, take a person who meditates observing not-self in all things.
They perceive not-self and experience not-self. Constantly, continually,
and without interruption, they apply the mind and fathom with wisdom.
..."

</article>
<article id="an7.19">

#### [AN 7.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"First, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
first person worthy of offerings.

Next, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. Their defilements and their life come to an end
at exactly the same time. This is the second person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom.

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between
one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

</article>
<article id="an7.20">

#### [AN 7.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Qualifications for Graduation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Niddasavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven qualifications for graduation. What
seven? It's when a mendicant has a keen enthusiasm to undertake the
training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of desires ... for
retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and alertness ... to
penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these desires in the
future. These are the seven qualifications for graduation."

</article>

[]{#an7-vajjisattakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Vajji Seven {#an7-vajjisattakavagga.xhtml_an7-vajjisattakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.21">

#### [AN 7.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Sārandada ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sārandadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Sārandada Tree-shrine. Then several Licchavis went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and the Buddha said to these
Licchavis:

"Licchavis, I will teach you these seven principles that prevent
decline. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? As long as the
Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings, they can expect growth,
not decline.

As long as the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry on
their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but undertake and follow the ancient Vajjian traditions as they
have been decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate Vajjian
elders, and think them worth listening to, they can expect growth, not
decline.

As long as the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women or girls of the
clans and make them live with them, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajjian
shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the proper
spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past, they can expect
growth, not decline.

As long as the Vajjis organize proper protection, shelter, and security
for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones might come to the realm
and those already here may live in comfort, they can expect growth, not
decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
Vajjis, and as long as the Vajjis are seen following them, they can
expect growth, not decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.22">

#### [AN 7.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vassakāra ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vassakārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of
Videha, wanted to invade the Vajjis. He declared: "I shall wipe out
these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy them, and lay ruin
and devastation upon them!"

And then King Ajātasattu addressed Vassakāra the brahmin minister of
Magadha, "Please, brahmin, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with
your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble,
strong, and living comfortably. And then say: 'Sir, King Ajātasattu of
Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, wants to invade the Vajjis. He
has declared: "I shall wipe out these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I
shall destroy them, and lay ruin and devastation upon them!"' Remember
well how the Buddha answers and tell it to me. For Realized Ones say
nothing that is not so."

"Yes, sir," Vassakāra replied. He went to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, King Ajātasattu bows with his head to your feet. He asks
if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.
King Ajātasattu wants to invade the Vajjis. He has declared: 'I shall
wipe out these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy them, and
lay ruin and devastation upon them!'"

Now at that time Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the Buddha fanning
him. Then the Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, have you heard that the
Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings, they can
expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in
harmony, and carry on their business in harmony?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry on
their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish
existing decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian
principles as they have been decreed?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian traditions as
they have been decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate Vajjian elders, and think them worth listening to?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate Vajjian
elders, and think them worth listening to, they can expect growth, not
decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women
or girls of the clans and make them live with them?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women or girls of the
clans and make them live with them, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate the Vajjian shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the
proper spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajjian
shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the proper
spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past, they can expect
growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis organize proper protection,
shelter, and security for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones
might come to the realm and those already here may live in comfort?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis organize proper protection, shelter, and security
for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones might come to the realm
and those already here may live in comfort, they can expect growth, not
decline."

Then the Buddha said to Vassakāra:

"Brahmin, this one time I was staying near Vesālī at the Sārandada
woodland shrine. There I taught the Vajjis these principles that prevent
decline. As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last
among the Vajjis, and as long as the Vajjis are seen following them,
they can expect growth, not decline."

When the Buddha had spoken, Vassakāra said to him: "Mister Gotama, if
the Vajjis follow even a single one of these principles they can expect
growth, not decline. How much more so all seven! King Ajātasattu cannot
defeat the Vajjis in war, unless by bribery or by sowing dissension.
Well, now, Mister Gotama, I must go. I have many duties, and much to
do."

"Please, brahmin, go at your convenience." Then Vassakāra the brahmin,
having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, got up from his
seat and left.

</article>
<article id="an7.23">

#### [AN 7.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-Decline for Mendicants (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasattakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, I will teach you these seven principles that prevent
decline. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the seven principles that prevent decline? As long as the
mendicants meet frequently and have many meetings, they can expect
growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry
on their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but undertake and follow the training rules as they have been
decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the
senior mendicants---of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and
leaders of the Saṅgha---and think them worth listening to, they can
expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants don't fall under the sway of arisen craving
for future lives, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants take care to live in wilderness lodgings, they
can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants individually establish mindfulness, so that
more good-hearted spiritual companions might come, and those that have
already come may live comfortably, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.24">

#### [AN 7.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-Decline for Mendicants (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasattakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline.
Listen and apply your mind well ... And what are the seven principles
that prevent decline?

As long as the mendicants don't relish work, loving it and liking to
relish it, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as they don't enjoy talk ... sleep ... company ... they don't
have corrupt wishes, falling under the sway of corrupt wishes ... they
don't have bad friends, companions, and associates ... they don't stop
half-way after achieving some insignificant distinction, they can expect
growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.25">

#### [AN 7.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-Decline for Mendicants (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasattakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline.
Listen and apply your mind well ... And what are the seven principles
that prevent decline? As long as the mendicants are faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... learned ... energetic ... mindful ...
wise, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.26">

#### [AN 7.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Awakening Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bojjhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline.
Listen and apply your mind well ... And what are the seven principles
that prevent decline? As long as the mendicants develop the awakening
factor of mindfulness ... investigation of principles ... energy ...
rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ... equanimity, they can expect
growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.27">

#### [AN 7.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline.
Listen and apply your mind well ... And what are the seven principles
that prevent decline? As long as the mendicants develop the perception
of impermanence ...

not-self ... ugliness ... drawbacks ... giving up ... fading away ...
cessation, they can expect growth, not decline. As long as these seven
principles that prevent decline last among the mendicants, and as long
as the mendicants are seen following them, they can expect growth, not
decline."

</article>
<article id="an7.28">

#### [AN 7.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline for a Mendicant Trainee ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaparihānisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants:

"These seven things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
seven? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don't guard the
sense doors and they eat too much. And when there is Saṅgha business to
be carried out, they don't reflect: 'There are senior mendicants in the
Saṅgha of long standing, long gone forth, responsible. They'll be known
for taking care of this.' So they try to do it themselves. These seven
things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.
What seven? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They guard
the sense doors and don't eat too much. And when there is Saṅgha
business to be carried out, they reflect: 'There are senior mendicants
in the Saṅgha of long standing, long gone forth, responsible. They'll be
known for taking care of this.' So they don't try to do it themselves.
These seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an7.29">

#### [AN 7.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Non-decline for a Lay Follower ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaparihānisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These seven things lead to the decline of a lay follower. What seven?
They miss out on seeing the mendicants. They neglect listening to the
true teaching. They don't train in higher ethical conduct. They're very
suspicious about mendicants, whether senior, junior, or middle. They
listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They seek
outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of religious
donations. And they serve them first. These seven things lead to the
decline of a lay follower.

These seven things don't lead to the decline of a lay follower. What
seven? They don't miss out on seeing the mendicants. They don't neglect
listening to the true teaching. They train in higher ethical conduct.
They're very confident about mendicants, whether senior, junior, or
middle. They don't listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding
mind. They don't seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy
of religious donations. And they serve the Buddhist community first.
These seven things don't lead to the decline of a lay follower."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "A lay follower misses out on seeing\
> those who are evolved\
> and listening to the teachings of the Noble One.\
> They don't train in higher ethical conduct,
>
> and their suspicion about mendicants\
> just grows and grows.\
> They want to listen to the true teaching\
> with a fault-finding mind.
>
> They seek outside the Buddhist community\
> for someone else worthy of religious donations,\
> and that lay follower\
> serves them first.
>
> These seven principles leading to decline\
> have been well taught.\
> A lay follower who practices them\
> falls away from the true teaching.
>
> A lay follower doesn't miss out on seeing\
> those who are evolved\
> and listening to the teachings of the Noble One.\
> They train in higher ethical conduct,
>
> and their confidence in mendicants\
> just grows and grows.\
> They want to listen to the true teaching\
> without a fault-finding mind.
>
> They don't seek outside the Buddhist community\
> for someone else worthy of religious donations,\
> and that lay follower\
> serves the Buddhist community first.
>
> These seven principles that prevent decline\
> have been well taught.\
> A lay follower who practices them\
> doesn't fall away from the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an7.30">

#### [AN 7.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Failures for a Lay Follower ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vipattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven failures for a lay follower ...

There are these seven accomplishments for a lay follower ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.31">

#### [AN 7.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Downfalls for a Lay Follower ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parābhavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven downfalls for a lay follower ...
There are these seven successes for a lay follower. What seven?

They don't miss out on seeing the mendicants.

They don't neglect listening to the true teaching.

They train in higher ethical conduct.

They're very confident about mendicants, whether senior, junior, or
middle.

They don't listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind.

They don't seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of
religious donations.

And they serve the Buddhist community first.

These are the seven successes for a lay follower.

> A lay follower misses out on seeing\
> those who are evolved\
> and listening to the teachings of the Noble One.\
> They don't train in higher ethical conduct,
>
> and their suspicion about mendicants\
> just grows and grows.\
> They want to listen to the true teaching\
> with a fault-finding mind.
>
> They seek outside the Buddhist community\
> for someone else worthy of religious donations,\
> and that lay follower\
> serves them first.
>
> These seven principles leading to decline\
> have been well taught.\
> A lay follower who practices these\
> falls away from the true teaching.
>
> A lay follower doesn't miss out on seeing\
> those who are evolved\
> and listening to the teachings of the Noble One.\
> They train in higher ethical conduct,
>
> and their confidence in mendicants\
> just grows and grows.\
> They want to listen to the true teaching\
> without a fault-finding mind.
>
> They don't seek outside the Buddhist community\
> for someone else worthy of religious donations,\
> and that lay follower\
> serves the Buddhist community first.
>
> These seven principles that prevent decline\
> have been well taught.\
> A lay follower who practices them\
> doesn't fall away from the true teaching."

</article>

[]{#an7-devatavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Deities {#an7-devatavagga.xhtml_an7-devatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.32">

#### [AN 7.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Respect for Diligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appamādagāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee. What seven? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the
Saṅgha, for the training, for immersion, for diligence, and for
hospitality. These seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, adding:

> "Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> respect for immersion, being energetic,\
> and keen respect for the training.
>
> A mendicant who respects diligence\
> and hospitality\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an7.33">

#### [AN 7.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Respect for Conscience ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Hirigāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, came to me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these
seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
seven? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for
the training, for immersion, for conscience, and for prudence. These
seven things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there.

> Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> respect for immersion, being energetic,\
> and keen respect for the training.
>
> One with both conscience and prudence,\
> reverential and respectful,\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an7.34">

#### [AN 7.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Easy to Admonish (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasovacassatāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, tonight a deity ... said to me: 'Sir, these seven things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What seven? Respect
for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training, for
immersion; being easy to admonish, and good friendship. These seven
things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there.

> Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> respect for immersion, being energetic,\
> and keen respect for the training.
>
> One with good friends, easy to admonish,\
> reverential and respectful,\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an7.35">

#### [AN 7.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Easy to Admonish (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasovacassatāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, tonight a deity ... said to me: 'Sir, these seven things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What seven? Respect
for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the training, for
immersion; being easy to admonish, and good friendship. These seven
things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement.

It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher and praises such
respect. And they encourage other mendicants who lack such respect to
respect the Teacher. And they praise other mendicants who respect the
Teacher at the right time, truthfully and correctly.

They personally respect the teaching ...

They personally respect the Saṅgha ...

They personally respect the training ...

They personally respect immersion ...

They are personally easy to admonish ...

They personally have good friends, and praise such friendship. And they
encourage other mendicants who lack good friends to develop good
friendship. And they praise other mendicants who have good friends at
the right time, truthfully and correctly.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher ... And they
encourage other mendicants who lack such respect to respect the Teacher.
And they praise other mendicants who respect the Teacher at the right
time, truthfully and correctly.

They personally respect the teaching ...

They personally respect the Saṅgha ...

They personally respect the training ...

They personally respect immersion ...

They are personally easy to admonish ...

They personally have good friends, and praise such friendship. And they
encourage other mendicants who lack good friends to develop good
friendship. And they praise other mendicants who have good friends at
the right time, truthfully and correctly.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

</article>
<article id="an7.36">

#### [AN 7.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Friend (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has seven factors.
What seven? They give what is hard to give. They do what is hard to do.
They endure what is hard to endure. They reveal their secrets to you.
They keep your secrets. They don't abandon you in times of trouble. They
don't look down on you in times of loss. You should associate with a
friend who has these seven factors.

> A friend gives what is hard to give,\
> and does what's hard to do.\
> They put up with your harsh words,\
> and with things hard to endure.
>
> They tell you their secrets,\
> and keep your secrets for you.\
> They don't abandon you in times of trouble,\
> or look down on you in times of loss.
>
> The person in whom\
> these things are found is your friend.\
> If you want to have a friend,\
> you should keep company with such a person."

</article>
<article id="an7.37">

#### [AN 7.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Friend (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a friend has seven qualities you should associate
with, accompany, and attend them, even if they send you away. What
seven? They're likable, agreeable, respected, and admired. They admonish
you and they accept admonishment. They speak on deep matters. And they
don't urge you to do bad things. When a friend has these seven qualities
you should associate with, accompany, and attend them, even if they send
you away.

> They're lovable, respected, and admired,\
> an admonisher who accepts admonishment,\
> speaks on deep matters,\
> and doesn't urge you to do bad.
>
> The person in whom\
> these things are found is your friend.\
> If you want to have a friend,\
> benevolent and sympathetic,\
> you should keep company with such a person,\
> even if they send you away."

</article>
<article id="an7.38">

#### [AN 7.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Textual Analysis (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapaṭisambhidāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities will soon realize the four
kinds of textual analysis and live having achieved them with their own
insight. What seven?

It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is mental sluggishness'.

They truly understand internally constricted mind as 'internally
constricted mind'.

They truly understand externally scattered mind as 'externally scattered
mind'.

They know feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away.

They know perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go
away.

They know thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away.

The patterns of qualities---suitable or unsuitable, inferior or
superior, or those on the side of dark or bright---are properly grasped,
focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom.

A mendicant with these seven qualities will soon realize the four kinds
of textual analysis and live having achieved them with their own
insight."

</article>
<article id="an7.39">

#### [AN 7.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Textual Analysis (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapaṭisambhidāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, having seven qualities, Sāriputta realized the four kinds
of textual analysis and lives having achieved them with his own insight.
What seven?

It's when Sāriputta truly understood: 'This is mental sluggishness'.

He truly understood internally constricted mind as 'internally
constricted mind'.

He truly understood externally scattered mind as 'externally scattered
mind'.

He knew feelings, perceptions, and thoughts as they arose, as they
remained, and as they went away.

The patterns of qualities---suitable or unsuitable, inferior or
superior, or those on the side of dark or bright---were properly
grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom.

Having these seven qualities, Sāriputta realized the four kinds of
textual analysis and lives having achieved them with his own insight."

</article>
<article id="an7.40">

#### [AN 7.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mastery of the Mind (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities masters their mind and is
not mastered by it. What seven? It's when a mendicant is skilled at
immersion, skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining in
immersion, skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening the
mind for immersion, skilled in the meditation subjects for immersion,
and skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion. A mendicant
with these seven qualities masters their mind and is not mastered by
it."

</article>
<article id="an7.41">

#### [AN 7.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mastery of the Mind (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, having seven qualities Sāriputta has mastered his mind and
is not mastered by it. What seven? Sāriputta is skilled at immersion,
skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion,
skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening the mind for
immersion, skilled in the meditation subjects for immersion, and skilled
in projecting the mind purified by immersion. Having these seven
qualities Sāriputta has mastered his mind and is not mastered by it."

</article>
<article id="an7.42">

#### [AN 7.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Graduation (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaniddasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too
early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why don't I visit the monastery of
the wanderers of other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.

Now at that time while those wanderers of other religions were sitting
together this discussion came up among them, "Reverends, anyone who
lives the full and pure spiritual life for twelve years is qualified to
be called a 'graduate mendicant'."

Sāriputta neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the wanderers
of other religions. He got up from his seat, thinking, "I will learn the
meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then Sāriputta wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his
return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened, adding:

"Sir, in this teaching and training can we describe a mendicant as a
'graduate' solely because they have completed a certain number of
years?"

"No, Sāriputta, we cannot. I make known these seven qualifications for
graduation after realizing them with my own insight.

What seven? It's when a mendicant has a keen enthusiasm to undertake the
training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of desires ... for
retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and alertness ... to
penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these desires in the
future. These are the seven qualifications for graduation that I make
known after realizing them with my own insight. A mendicant who has
these seven qualifications for graduation is qualified to be called a
'graduate mendicant'. This is so whether they have lived the full and
pure spiritual life for twelve years, twenty-four years, thirty-six
years, or forty-eight years."

</article>
<article id="an7.43">

#### [AN 7.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Graduation (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaniddasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Kosambī for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too early
to wander for alms in Kosambī. Why don't I visit the monastery of the
wanderers of other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.

Now at that time while those wanderers of other religions were sitting
together this discussion came up among them, "Reverends, anyone who
lives the full and pure spiritual life for twelve years is qualified to
be called a 'graduate mendicant'."

Ānanda neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the wanderers of
other religions. He got up from his seat, thinking, "I will learn the
meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Kosambī. After the meal, on his return
from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what had happened, adding:

"Sir, in this teaching and training can we describe a mendicant as a
'graduate' solely because they have completed a certain number of
years?"

"No, Ānanda, we cannot. These are the seven qualifications for
graduation that I make known after realizing them with my own insight.

What seven? It's when someone is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. These are the seven
qualifications for graduation that I make known after realizing them
with my own insight. A mendicant who has these seven qualifications for
graduation is qualified to be called a 'graduate mendicant'. This is so
whether they have lived the full and pure spiritual life for twelve
years, twenty-four years, thirty-six years, or forty-eight years."

</article>

[]{#an7-mahayannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Great Sacrifice {#an7-mahayannavagga.xhtml_an7-mahayannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.44">

#### [AN 7.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Planes of Consciousness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattaviññāṇaṭṭhitisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven planes of consciousness. What seven?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in Brahmā's Host through the first
absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

These are the seven planes of consciousness."

</article>
<article id="an7.45">

#### [AN 7.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Prerequisites for Immersion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samādhiparikkhārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven prerequisites for immersion. What
seven? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. Unification of mind
with these seven factors as prerequisites is what is called noble right
immersion 'with its vital conditions' and also 'with its
prerequisites'."

</article>
<article id="an7.46">

#### [AN 7.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fires (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaaggisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven fires. What seven? The fires of
greed, hate, delusion. The fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods. A householder's fire. The fire of those worthy of a
religious donation. And a wood fire. These are the seven fires."

</article>
<article id="an7.47">

#### [AN 7.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fires (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaaggisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Now at that time the brahmin Uggatasarīra had prepared a large
sacrifice. Bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats and rams---five hundred of
each---had been led to the post for the sacrifice.

Then the brahmin Uggatasarīra went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, I
have heard that kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the
sacrificial post is very fruitful and beneficial."

"I've also heard this, brahmin."

For a second time ... and third time Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha,
"Mister Gotama, I have heard that kindling the sacrificial fire and
raising the sacrificial post is very fruitful and beneficial."

"I've also heard this, brahmin."

"Then Mister Gotama and I are in total agreement in this matter."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to Uggatasarīra, "Brahmin, you
shouldn't ask the Buddha in this way. You should ask in this way: 'Sir,
I want to kindle the sacrificial fire and raise the sacrificial post.
May the Buddha please advise and instruct me. It will be for my lasting
welfare and happiness.'"

Then Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, I want to kindle
the sacrificial fire and raise the sacrificial post. May Mister Gotama
please advise and instruct me. It will be for my lasting welfare and
happiness."

"Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial
post, one raises three unskillful knives which ripen and result in
suffering. What three? The knives of the body, speech, and mind. Even
before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post
one gives rise to the thought: 'May this many bulls, bullocks, heifers,
goats, and rams be slaughtered for the sacrifice!' Thinking, 'May I make
goodness', one makes wickedness. Thinking, 'May I do good', one does
bad. Thinking, 'May I seek the path to a good rebirth', one seeks the
path to a bad rebirth. Even before kindling the sacrificial fire and
raising the sacrificial post one raises this first unskillful mental
knife which ripens and results in suffering.

Furthermore, even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the
sacrificial post, one says such things as: 'May this many bulls,
bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams be slaughtered for the sacrifice!'
Thinking, 'May I make goodness', one makes wickedness. Thinking, 'May I
do good', one does bad. Thinking, 'May I seek the path to a good
rebirth', one seeks the path to a bad rebirth. Even before kindling the
sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post one raises this second
unskillful verbal knife which ripens and results in suffering.

Furthermore, even before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the
sacrificial post one first personally undertakes preparations for the
sacrificial slaughter of bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, and rams.
Thinking, 'May I make goodness', one makes wickedness. Thinking, 'May I
do good', one does bad. Thinking, 'May I seek the path to a good
rebirth', one seeks the path to a bad rebirth. Even before kindling the
sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, one raises this third
unskillful bodily knife which ripens and results in suffering. Even
before kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post,
one raises these three unskillful knives which ripen and result in
suffering.

Brahmin, these three fires should be given up and rejected, not
cultivated. What three? The fires of greed, hate, and delusion.

And why should the fire of greed be given up and rejected, not
cultivated? A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. That's why the fire of greed
should be given up and rejected, not cultivated.

And why should the fire of hate be given up and rejected, not
cultivated? A hateful person does bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. That's why the fire of hate
should be given up and rejected, not cultivated.

And why should the fire of delusion be given up and rejected, not
cultivated? A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. That's why the fire of
delusion should be given up and rejected, not cultivated. These three
fires should be given up and rejected, not cultivated.

Brahmin, you should properly and happily take care of three fires,
honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating them. What three? The
fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. The fire of a
householder. And the fire of those worthy of a religious donation.

And what is the fire of those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods?
Your mother and father are called the fire of those worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods. Why is that? Since it is from them that you've
been incubated and produced. So you should properly and happily take
care of this fire, honoring, respecting, esteeming, and venerating it.

And what is the fire of a householder? Your children, partners,
bondservants, servants, and workers are called a householder's fire. So
you should properly and happily take care of this fire, honoring,
respecting, esteeming, and venerating it.

And what is the fire of those worthy of a religious donation? The
ascetics and brahmins who avoid intoxication and negligence, are settled
in patience and sweetness, and who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves
are called the fire of those worthy of a religious donation. So you
should properly and happily take care of this fire, honoring,
respecting, esteeming, and venerating it. You should properly and
happily take care of these three fires, honoring, respecting, esteeming,
and venerating them.

But the wood fire, brahmin, should, from time to time, be fanned,
watched over with equanimity, extinguished, or put aside."

When he said this, the brahmin Uggatasarīra said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life. Mister Gotama, I now set free these five hundred bulls, five
hundred bullocks, five hundred heifers, five hundred goats, and five
hundred rams. I give them life! May they eat grass and drink cool water
and enjoy a cool breeze!"

</article>
<article id="an7.48">

#### [AN 7.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions in Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death.

What seven? The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food,
dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in
impermanence, and not-self in suffering. These seven perceptions, when
developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They
culminate in freedom from death and end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an7.49">

#### [AN 7.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions in Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What seven? The perceptions of ugliness,
death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world,
impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering.
These seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very
fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and end in
freedom from death.

'When the perception of ugliness is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? When a
mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of
ugliness, their mind draws back from sexual intercourse. They shrink
away, turn aside, and don't get drawn into it. And either equanimity or
revulsion become stabilized. It's like a chicken's feather or a scrap of
sinew thrown in a fire. It shrivels up, shrinks, rolls up, and doesn't
stretch out. In the same way, when a mendicant often meditates with a
mind reinforced with the perception of ugliness, their mind draws back
from sexual intercourse. ...

If a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the
perception of ugliness, but their mind is drawn to sexual intercourse,
and not repulsed, they should know: 'My perception of ugliness is
undeveloped. I don't have any distinction higher than before. I haven't
attained a fruit of development.' In this way they are aware of the
situation. But if a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced
with the perception of ugliness, their mind draws back from sexual
intercourse ... they should know: 'My perception of ugliness is well
developed. I have realized a distinction higher than before. I have
attained a fruit of development.' In this way they are aware of the
situation. 'When the perception of ugliness is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death
and ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'When the perception of death is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? When a
mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of
death, their mind draws back from desire to be reborn. ... That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'When the perception of the repulsiveness of food is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom
from death and ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced
with the perception of the repulsiveness of food, their mind draws back
from craving for tastes. ... That's what I said, and this is why I said
it.

'When the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world is
developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It
culminates in freedom from death and ends in freedom from death.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? When a mendicant often meditates with
a mind reinforced with the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole
world, their mind draws back from the world's shiny things. ... That's
what I said, and this is why I said it.

'When the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the
perception of impermanence, their mind draws back from material things,
honors, and fame. ... That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'When the perception of suffering in impermanence is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom
from death and ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced
with the perception of suffering in impermanence, they establish a keen
perception of the danger of sloth, laziness, slackness, negligence, lack
of commitment, and failure to review, like a killer with a drawn sword.
... That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'When the perception of not-self in suffering is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom
from death and ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced
with the perception of not-self in suffering, their mind is rid of
I-making, mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all
external stimuli. It has gone beyond discrimination, and is peaceful and
well freed.

If a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the
perception of not-self in suffering, but their mind is not rid of
I-making, mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all
external stimuli; nor has it gone beyond discrimination, and is not
peaceful or well freed, they should know: 'My perception of not-self in
suffering is undeveloped. I don't have any distinction higher than
before. I haven't attained a fruit of development.' In this way they are
aware of the situation.

But if a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the
perception of not-self in suffering, and their mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and it has gone beyond discrimination, and is peaceful and well
freed, they should know: 'My perception of not-self in suffering is well
developed. I have realized a distinction higher than before. I have
attained a fruit of development.' In this way they are aware of the
situation. 'When the perception of not-self in suffering is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in
freedom from death and ends in freedom from death.' That's what I said,
and this is why I said it.

These seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very
fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and end in
freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an7.50">

#### [AN 7.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sex ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Methunasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, "Does Mister
Gotama claim to be celibate?"

"Brahmin, if anyone should be rightly said to live the celibate life
intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, full and pure, it's me."

"But what, Mister Gotama, is a break, taint, stain, or mar in celibacy?"

"Firstly, an ascetic or brahmin who claims to be perfectly celibate does
not mutually engage in sex with a female. However, they consent to being
anointed, massaged, bathed, and rubbed by a female. They enjoy it and
like it and find it satisfying. This is a break, taint, stain, or mar in
celibacy. This is called one who lives the celibate life impurely, yoked
by the yoke of sex. They're not freed from rebirth, old age, death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

Furthermore, an ascetic or brahmin who claims to be perfectly celibate
does not mutually engage in sex with a female. Nor do they consent to
massage and bathing. However, they giggle and play and have fun with
females. ...

they gaze into a female's eyes. ...

they listen through a wall or rampart to the sound of females laughing
or chatting or singing or crying. ...

they recall when they used to laugh, chat, and have fun with females ...

they see a householder or their child amusing themselves, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. ...

They don't see a householder or their child amusing themselves, supplied
and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. However, they
live the celibate life wishing to be reborn in one of the orders of
gods. They think: 'By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or
spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' They enjoy it and like it
and find it satisfying. This is a break, taint, stain, or mar in
celibacy. This is called one who lives the celibate life impurely, yoked
by the yoke of sex. They're not free from rebirth, old age, death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not free from
suffering, I say.

As long as I saw that these seven sexual yokes---or even one of
them---had not been given up in me, I didn't announce my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I saw that these seven sexual yokes---every one of them---had
been given up in me, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. Knowledge and vision arose
in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there'll
be no more future lives.'"

When he said this, the brahmin Jānussoṇi said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an7.51">

#### [AN 7.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Yoking and Unyoking ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁyogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on yoking
and unyoking. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. ... And
what is the exposition of the teaching on yoking and unyoking?

A woman focuses on her own femininity: her feminine moves, feminine
appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and
feminine adornment. She's stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it.
So she focuses on the masculinity of others: masculine moves, masculine
appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and
masculine adornment. She's stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it.
So she desires to yoke herself to another. And she desires the pleasure
and happiness that comes from such yoking. Sentient beings who relish
their femininity are yoked to men. This is how a woman does not
transcend her femininity.

A man focuses on his own masculinity: his masculine moves, masculine
appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and
masculine adornment. He's stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it.
So he focuses on the femininity of others: feminine moves, feminine
appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice, and
feminine adornment. He's stimulated by this and takes pleasure in it. So
he desires to yoke himself to another. And he desires the pleasure and
happiness that comes from such yoking. Sentient beings who relish their
masculinity are yoked to women. This is how a man does not transcend his
masculinity. This is how yoking comes about.

And how does unyoking come about? A woman doesn't focus on her own
femininity: her feminine moves, feminine appearance, feminine ways,
feminine desires, feminine voice, and feminine adornment. She isn't
stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. So she doesn't focus on
the masculinity of others: masculine moves, masculine appearance,
masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and masculine
adornment. She isn't stimulated by this and takes no pleasure in it. So
she doesn't desire to yoke herself to another. Nor does she desire the
pleasure and happiness that comes from such yoking. Sentient beings who
do not relish their femininity are not yoked to men. This is how a woman
transcends her femininity.

A man doesn't focus on his own masculinity: masculine moves, masculine
appearance, masculine ways, masculine desires, masculine voice, and
masculine adornment. He isn't stimulated by this and takes no pleasure
in it. So he doesn't focus on the femininity of others: feminine moves,
feminine appearance, feminine ways, feminine desires, feminine voice,
and feminine adornment. He isn't stimulated by this and takes no
pleasure in it. So he doesn't desire to yoke himself to another. Nor
does he desire the pleasure and happiness that comes from such yoking.
Sentient beings who do not relish their masculinity are not yoked to
women. This is how a man transcends his masculinity. This is how
unyoking comes about. This is the exposition of the teaching on yoking
and unyoking."

</article>
<article id="an7.52">

#### [AN 7.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Very Fruitful Gift ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānamahapphalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the
Gaggarā Lotus Pond.

Then several lay followers of Campā went to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, it's been a long time since
we've heard a Dhamma talk from the Buddha. It would be good if we got to
hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha."

"Well then, reverends, come on the next sabbath day. Hopefully you'll
get to hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha."

"Yes, sir" they replied. Then they rose from their seats, bowed to
Sāriputta, and respectfully circled him before leaving.

Then on the next sabbath the lay followers of Campā went to Venerable
Sāriputta, bowed, and stood to one side. Then they went together with
Sāriputta to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Sāriputta said
to the Buddha:

"Sir, could it be that someone gives a gift and it is not very fruitful
or beneficial, while someone else gives exactly the same gift and it is
very fruitful and beneficial?"

"Indeed it could, Sāriputta."

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason for this?"

"Sāriputta, take the case of a someone who gives a gift as an
investment, their mind tied to it, expecting to keep it, thinking 'I'll
enjoy this in my next life'. They give to ascetics or brahmins such
things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. What do you think, Sāriputta,
don't some people give gifts in this way?"

"Yes, sir."

"Sāriputta, someone who gives a gift as an investment, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of the four
great kings. When that deed, success, fame, and sovereignty is spent
they return to this place.

Next, take the case of a someone who gives a gift not as an investment,
their mind not tied to it, not expecting to keep it, and not thinking,
'I'll enjoy this in my next life'. But they give a gift thinking, 'It's
good to give' ...

They give a gift thinking, 'Giving was practiced by my father and my
father's father. It would not be right for me to abandon this family
tradition.' ...

They give a gift thinking, 'I cook, they don't. It wouldn't be right for
me to not give to them.' ...

They give a gift thinking, 'The ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha,
Kassapa, and Bhagu. Just as they performed great sacrifices, I will
share a gift.' ...

They give a gift thinking, 'When giving this gift my mind becomes clear,
and I become happy and joyful.' ...

They don't give a gift thinking, 'When giving this gift my mind becomes
clear, and I become happy and joyful.' But they give a gift thinking,
'This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.' They give to ascetics
or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. What do you think,
Sāriputta, don't some people give gifts in this way?"

"Yes, sir."

"Sāriputta, someone who gives gifts, not for any other reason, but
thinking, 'This is an adornment and requisite for the mind', when their
body breaks up, after death, is reborn among the gods of Brahmā's Host.
When that deed, success, fame, and sovereignty is spent they are a
non-returner; they do not return to this place.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone gives a gift and it is
not very fruitful or beneficial, while someone else gives exactly the
same gift and it is very fruitful and beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an7.53">

#### [AN 7.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nanda's Mother ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nandamātāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the venerables Sāriputta and
Mahāmoggallāna were wandering in the Southern Hills together with a
large Saṅgha of mendicants. Now at that time the laywoman Veḷukaṇṭakī,
Nanda's mother, rose at the crack of dawn and recited the verses of "The
Way to the Far Shore".

And at that time the great king Vessavaṇa was on his way from the north
to the south on some business. He heard Nanda's Mother reciting, and
stood waiting for her to finish.

Then when her recital was over she fell silent. Then, knowing she had
finished, Vessavaṇa applauded, saying, "Good, sister! Good, sister!"

"But who might you be, dearest?"

"Sister, I am your brother Vessavaṇa, the great king."

"Good, dearest! Then may my recital of the teaching be my offering to
you as my guest."

'Good, sister! And let this also be your offering to me as your guest.
Tomorrow, the mendicant Saṅgha headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna will
arrive at Veḷukaṇṭa before breakfast. When you've served the Saṅgha,
please dedicate the religious donation to me. Then that will also be
your offering to me as your guest."

And when the night had passed the lay woman Nanda's Mother had delicious
fresh and cooked foods prepared in her own home. Then the Saṅgha of
mendicants headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna arrived at Veḷukaṇṭa. Then
Nanda's Mother addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to the monastery and
announce the time to the Saṅgha, saying: 'Sirs, it's time. The meal is
ready in the home of the lady Nanda's Mother.'"

"Yes, Ma'am," that man replied, and he did as she said.

And then the Saṅgha of mendicants headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna
robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to the
home of Nanda's Mother, where they sat on the seats spread out. Then
Nanda's Mother served and satisfied them with her own hands with
delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When Sāriputta had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Nanda's Mother
sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to her, "Nanda's Mother, who told
you that the Saṅgha of mendicants was about to arrive?"

"Sir, last night I rose at the crack of dawn and recited the verses of
'The Way to the Far Shore', and then I fell silent. Then the great king
Vessavaṇa, knowing I had finished, applauded me, 'Good, sister! Good,
sister!'

I asked: 'But who might you be, dearest?'

'Sister, I am your brother Vessavaṇa, the great king.'

'Good, dearest! Then may my recital of the teaching be my offering to
you as my guest.'

'Good, sister! And let this also be your offering to me as your guest.
Tomorrow, the mendicant Saṅgha headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna will
arrive at Veḷukaṇṭa before breakfast. When you've served the Saṅgha,
please dedicate the religious donation to me. Then that will also be
your offering to me as your guest.'

And so, sir, may the merit and the flourishing of merit of this gift be
for the happiness of the great king Vessavaṇa."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing that you converse face to
face with a mighty and illustrious god like the great king Vessavaṇa."

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. I had an only son called Nanda who I loved dearly. The rulers
forcibly abducted him on some pretext and had him executed. But I can't
recall getting upset when my boy was under arrest or being arrested,
imprisoned or being put in prison, killed or being killed."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing that you purify even the
arising of a thought."

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. When my husband passed away he was reborn in one of the realms
of spirits. He revealed to me his previous incarnation. But I can't
recall getting upset on that account."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing that you purify even the
arising of a thought."

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. Ever since we were both young, and I was given in marriage to
my husband, I can't recall betraying him even in thought, still less in
deed."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing that you purify even the
arising of a thought."

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. Ever since I declared myself a lay follower, I can't recall
deliberately breaking any precept."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing!"

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. Whenever I want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with
internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping
it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in
the third absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and
aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, I enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure
or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing!"

"Sir, this is not my only incredible and amazing quality; there is
another. Of the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha, I don't see any
that I haven't given up."

"It's incredible, Nanda's Mother, it's amazing!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired
Nanda's Mother with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat
and left.

</article>

[]{#an7-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an7-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an7-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on the Undeclared Points {#an7-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an7-abyakatavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.54">

#### [AN 7.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Undeclared Points ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abyākatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why a learned noble disciple
has no doubts regarding the undeclared points?"

"Mendicant, it's due to the cessation of views that a learned noble
disciple has no doubts regarding the undeclared points. 'A realized one
still exists after death': this is a misconception. 'A realized one no
longer exists after death': this is a misconception. 'A realized one
both still exists and no longer exists after death': this is a
misconception. 'A realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists
after death': this is a misconception. An unlearned ordinary person
doesn't understand views, their origin, their cessation, or the practice
that leads to their cessation. And so their views grow. They're not
freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress. They're not freed from suffering, I say.

A learned noble disciple does understand views, their origin, their
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. And so their
views cease. They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from
suffering, I say. Knowing and seeing this, a learned noble disciple does
not answer: 'A realized one still exists after death', 'A realized one
no longer exists after death', 'a realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death', 'a realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists after death.' Knowing and seeing this, a learned noble
disciple does not declare the undeclared points. Knowing and seeing
this, a learned noble disciple doesn't shake, tremble, quake, or get
nervous regarding the undeclared points.

'A realized one still exists after death': this is just about craving.
... it's just about perception ... it's a conceiving ... it's a
proliferation ... it's just about grasping ... 'A realized one still
exists after death': this is a regret. 'A realized one no longer exists
after death': this is a regret. 'A realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death': this is a regret. 'A realized one neither
still exists nor no longer exists after death': this is a regret. An
unlearned ordinary person doesn't understand regrets, their origin,
their cessation, or the practice that leads to their cessation. And so
their regrets grow. They're not freed from rebirth, old age, and death,
from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed
from suffering, I say.

A learned noble disciple does understand regrets, their origin, their
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. And so their
regrets cease. They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from
suffering, I say. Knowing and seeing this, a learned noble disciple does
not answer: 'A realized one still exists after death' ... 'a realized
one neither still exists nor no longer exists after death.' Knowing and
seeing this, a learned noble disciple does not declare the undeclared
points. Knowing and seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't shake,
tremble, quake, or get nervous regarding the undeclared points. This is
the cause, this is the reason why a learned noble disciple has no doubts
regarding the undeclared points."

</article>
<article id="an7.55">

#### [AN 7.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Places People Are Reborn ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Purisagatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven places people are reborn, and
extinguishment by not grasping. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," the mendicants replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what are the seven places people are reborn?

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up
what exists, what has come to be.' They gain equanimity. They're not
attached to life, or to creating a new life. And they see with right
wisdom that there is a peaceful state beyond. But they haven't
completely realized that state. They haven't totally given up the
underlying tendencies of conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.
With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between
one life and the next. Suppose you struck an iron pot that had been
heated all day. Any spark that flew off would be extinguished. In the
same way, a mendicant who practices like this ... With the ending of the
five lower fetters they're extinguished between one life and the next.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up
what exists, what has come to be.' They gain equanimity. They're not
attached to life, or to creating a new life. And they see with right
wisdom that there is a peaceful state beyond. But they haven't totally
realized that state. They haven't completely given up the underlying
tendencies of conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between one life
and the next. Suppose you struck an iron pot that had been heated all
day. Any spark that flew off and floated away would be extinguished. In
the same way, a mendicant who practices like this ... With the ending of
the five lower fetters they're extinguished between one life and the
next.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. ...' With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished between one life and the next. Suppose you struck an iron
pot that had been heated all day. Any spark that flew off and floated
away would be extinguished just before landing. In the same way, a
mendicant who practices like this ... With the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished between one life and the next.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. ...' With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished upon landing. Suppose you struck an iron pot that had been
heated all day. Any spark that flew off and floated away would be
extinguished on landing. In the same way, a mendicant who practices like
this ... 'It might not be, and it might not be mine. ...' With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon landing.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. ...' With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished without extra effort. Suppose you struck an iron pot that
had been heated all day. Any spark that flew off and floated away would
fall on a little heap of grass or twigs. There it would ignite a fire
and produce smoke. But the fire would consume the grass or twigs and
become extinguished due to not being fed. In the same way, a mendicant
who practices like this ... 'It might not be, and it might not be mine.
...' With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished
without extra effort.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. ...' With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished with extra effort. Suppose you struck an iron pot that had
been heated all day. Any spark that flew off and floated away would fall
on a large heap of grass or twigs. There it would ignite a fire and
produce smoke. But the fire would consume the grass or twigs and become
extinguished due to not being fed. In the same way, a mendicant who
practices like this ... 'It might not be, and it might not be mine. ...'
With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort.

Take a mendicant who practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might
not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up
what exists, what has come to be.' They gain equanimity. They're not
attached to life, or to creating a new life. And they see with right
wisdom that there is a peaceful state beyond. But they haven't totally
realized that state. They haven't completely given up the underlying
tendencies of conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the
Akaniṭṭha realm. Suppose you struck an iron pot that had been heated all
day. Any spark that flew off and floated away would fall on a huge heap
of grass or twigs. There it would ignite a fire and produce smoke. And
after consuming the grass and twigs, the fire would burn up plants and
trees until it reached a green field, a roadside, a cliff's edge, a body
of water, or cleared parkland, where it would be extinguished due to not
being fed. In the same way, a mendicant who practices like this ... 'It
might not be, and it might not be mine. ...' With the ending of the five
lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. These
are the seven places people are reborn.

And what is extinguishment by not grasping? Take a mendicant who
practices like this: 'It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will
not be, and it will not be mine. I am giving up what exists, what has
come to be.' They gain equanimity. They're not attached to life, or to
creating a new life. And they see with right wisdom that there is a
peaceful state beyond. And they have totally realized that state.
They've completely given up the underlying tendencies of conceit, desire
to be reborn, and ignorance. They've realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is
called extinguishment by not grasping.

These are the seven places people are reborn, and extinguishment by not
grasping."

</article>
<article id="an7.56">

#### [AN 7.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Tissa the Brahmā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tissabrahmāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then, late at night, two glorious deities, lighting up the entire
Vulture's Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. One
deity said to him, "Sir, these nuns are freed!"

The other deity said to him, "Sir, these nuns are well freed with no
residue!"

This is what those deities said, and the teacher approved. Then those
deities, knowing that the teacher approved, bowed and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right
there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened.

Now at that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was sitting not far from the
Buddha. He thought, "Which gods know whether a person has anything left
over or not?"

Now, at that time a monk called Tissa had recently passed away and been
reborn in a Brahmā realm. There they knew that Tissa the Brahmā was very
mighty and powerful.

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong person would
extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Vulture's Peak and
reappeared in that Brahmā realm.

Tissa saw Moggallāna coming off in the distance, and said to him, "Come,
my good Moggallāna! Welcome, my good Moggallāna! It's been a long time
since you took the opportunity to come here. Sit, my good Moggallāna,
this seat is for you."

Moggallāna sat down on the seat spread out. Then Tissa bowed to
Moggallāna and sat to one side.

Moggallāna said to him, "Which gods know whether a person has anything
left over or not?"

"The gods of Brahmā's Host know this."

"But do all of them know this?"

"No, my good Moggallāna, not all of them.

Those gods of Brahmā's Host who are content with the lifespan of Brahmā,
with the beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty of Brahmā, and who
don't truly understand any escape beyond: they don't know this. But
those gods of Brahmā's Host who are not content with the lifespan of
Brahmā, with the beauty, happiness, fame, and sovereignty of Brahmā, and
who do truly understand any escape beyond: they do know this.

Take a mendicant who is freed both ways. The gods know of them: 'This
venerable is freed both ways. As long as their body remains they will be
seen by gods and humans. But when their body breaks up gods and humans
will see them no more.' This too is how those gods know whether a person
has anything left over or not.

Take a mendicant who is freed by wisdom. The gods know of them: 'This
venerable is freed by wisdom. As long as their body remains they will be
seen by gods and humans. But when their body breaks up gods and humans
will see them no more.' This too is how those gods know whether a person
has anything left over or not.

Take a mendicant who is a direct witness. The gods know of them: 'This
venerable is a direct witness. Hopefully this venerable will frequent
appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their
faculties. Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the
spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.' This too is how those gods know whether a person
has anything left over or not.

Take a mendicant who is attained to view. ... freed by faith ... a
follower of teachings. The gods know of them: 'This venerable is a
follower of teachings. Hopefully this venerable will frequent
appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their
faculties. Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the
spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their
own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay
life to homelessness.' This too is how those gods know whether a person
has anything left over or not."

Moggallāna approved and agreed with what Tissa the Brahmā said. Then, as
easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he
vanished from the Brahmā realm and reappeared on the Vulture's Peak.
Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened.

"But Moggallāna, Tissa the Brahmā didn't teach the seventh person, the
signless meditator."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! May the Buddha
teach the seventh person, the signless meditator. The mendicants will
listen and remember it."

"Well then, Moggallāna, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Mahāmoggallāna replied. The Buddha said this:

"Moggallāna, take the case of a mendicant who, not focusing on any
signs, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. The
gods know of them: 'This venerable, not focusing on any signs, enters
and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. Hopefully this
venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good
friends, and control their faculties. Then they might realize the
supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live
having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.' This too is how
those gods know whether a person has anything left over or not."

</article>
<article id="an7.57">

#### [AN 7.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [General Sīha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhasenāpatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then
General Sīha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, can you point out a fruit of giving that's apparent in the present
life?"

"Well then, Sīha, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer
as you like. What do you think, Sīha? Consider two people. One is
faithless, stingy, miserly, and abusive. One is a faithful donor who
loves charity. Which do you think the perfected ones will show sympathy
for first?"

"Why would the perfected ones first show sympathy for the person who is
faithless, stingy, miserly, and abusive? They'd show sympathy first for
the faithful donor who loves charity."

"Which do you think the perfected ones will first approach?" "They'd
first approach the faithful donor who loves charity."

"Which do you think the perfected ones will receive alms from first?"
"They'd receive alms first from the faithful donor who loves charity."

"Which do you think the perfected ones will teach the Dhamma to first?"
"They'd first teach the Dhamma to the faithful donor who loves charity."

"Which do you think would get a good reputation?" "The faithful donor
who loves charity would get a good reputation."

"Which do you think would enter any kind of assembly bold and assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics?"

"How could the person who is faithless, stingy, miserly, and abusive
enter any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether it's an assembly of
aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics? The faithful donor who
loves charity would enter any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether
it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics."

"When their body breaks up, after death, which do you think would be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Why would the person who is faithless, stingy, miserly, and abusive be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm? The faithful donor who loves
charity would, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm.

When it comes to these fruits of giving that are apparent in the present
life, I don't have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too.
I'm a giver, a donor, and the perfected ones show sympathy for me first.
I'm a giver, and the perfected ones approach me first. I'm a giver, and
the perfected ones receive alms from me first. I'm a giver, and the
perfected ones teach me Dhamma first. I'm a giver, and I have this good
reputation: 'General Sīha gives, serves, and attends on the Saṅgha.' I'm
a giver, I enter any kind of assembly bold and assured, whether it's an
assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics. When it
comes to these fruits of giving that are apparent in the present life, I
don't have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too. But when
the Buddha says: 'When a giver's body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' I don't know this, so I have
to rely on faith in the Buddha."

"That's so true, Sīha! That's so true! When a giver's body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

</article>
<article id="an7.58">

#### [AN 7.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nothing to Hide ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arakkheyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are four areas where the Realized One has nothing to
hide, and three ways he is irreproachable. What are the four areas where
the Realized One has nothing to hide?

His bodily behavior is pure. So the Realized One has no bodily
misconduct to hide, thinking: 'Don't let others find this out about me!'

His verbal behavior is pure. So the Realized One has no verbal
misconduct to hide, thinking: 'Don't let others find this out about me!'

His mental behavior is pure. So the Realized One has no mental
misconduct to hide, thinking: 'Don't let others find this out about me!'

His livelihood is pure. So the Realized One has no wrong livelihood to
hide, thinking: 'Don't let others find this out about me!'

These are the four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide.

What are the three ways the Realized One is irreproachable?

The Realized One has explained the teaching well. I see no reason for
anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else
in the world---to legitimately scold me, saying: 'For such and such
reasons you haven't explained the teaching well.' Since I see no such
reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured.

I have clearly described the practice that leads to extinguishment for
my disciples. Practicing in accordance with this, my disciples realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic,
brahmin, god, Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to
legitimately scold me, saying: 'For such and such reasons you haven't
clearly described the practice that leads to extinguishment for your
disciples.' Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and
assured.

Many hundreds in my assembly of disciples have realized the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. I see no reason for anyone---whether ascetic, brahmin, god,
Māra, or Brahmā, or anyone else in the world---to legitimately scold me,
saying: 'For such and such reasons you don't have many hundreds of
disciples in your following who have realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and who live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.'
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured.

These are the three ways the Realized One is irreproachable.

These are the four areas where the Realized One has nothing to hide, and
the three ways he is irreproachable."

</article>
<article id="an7.59">

#### [AN 7.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kimbila ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kimilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then Venerable Kimbila went up
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training,
immersion, diligence, and hospitality after the final quenching of the
Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why the true
teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain
respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, diligence, and hospitality after the final
quenching of the Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why
the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the
Realized One."

</article>
<article id="an7.60">

#### [AN 7.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Seven Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities soon realizes the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. They live having
achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness. What seven? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, secluded, energetic, mindful,
and wise. A mendicant with these seven qualities soon realizes the
supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. They live
having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness."

</article>
<article id="an7.61">

#### [AN 7.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nodding Off ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pacalāyamānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in the land
of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood.

Now at that time, in the land of the Magadhans near Kallavāḷamutta
Village, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was nodding off while meditating. The
Buddha saw him with his clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman.
Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
he vanished from the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood in the land of the
Bhaggas and reappeared in front of Mahāmoggallāna near Kallavāḷamutta
Village in the land of the Magadhans.

He sat on the seat spread out and said to Mahāmoggallāna, "Are you
nodding off, Moggallāna? Are you nodding off?"

"Yes, sir."

"So, Moggallāna, don't focus on or cultivate the perception that you
were meditating on when you fell drowsy. It's possible that you'll give
up drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then think about and consider the
teaching as you've learned and memorized it, examining it with your
mind. It's possible that you'll give up drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then recite in detail the teaching as
you've learned and memorized it. It's possible that you'll give up
drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then pinch your ears and rub your limbs.
It's possible that you'll give up drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then get up from your seat, flush your
eyes with water, look around in every direction, and look up at the
stars and constellations. It's possible that you'll give up drowsiness
in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then apply your mind to the perception of
light, focusing on the perception of day: as by day, so by night; as by
night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, develop a
mind that's full of radiance. It's possible that you'll give up
drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then walk mindfully, focusing on the
perception of before and behind, your faculties directed inwards and
your mind not scattered outside. It's possible that you'll give up
drowsiness in this way.

But what if that doesn't work? Then lie down in the lion's posture---on
the right side, placing one foot on top of the other---mindful and
aware, and focused on the time of getting up. When you wake, you should
get up quickly, thinking: 'I will not live indulging in the pleasures of
sleeping, lying down, and drowsing.' That's how you should train.

So you should train like this: 'I will not approach families with my
head swollen with vanity.' That's how you should train. What happens if
a mendicant approaches families with a head swollen with vanity? Well,
families have business to attend to, so people might not notice when a
mendicant arrives. In that case the mendicant thinks: 'Who on earth has
turned this family against me? It seems they don't like me any more.'
And so, because they don't get anything they feel dismayed. Being
dismayed, they become restless. Being restless, they lose restraint. And
without restraint the mind is far from immersion.

So you should train like this: 'I won't get into arguments.' That's how
you should train. When there's an argument, you can expect there'll be
lots of talking. When there's lots of talking, people become restless.
Being restless, they lose restraint. And without restraint the mind is
far from immersion. Moggallāna, I don't praise all kinds of closeness.
Nor do I criticize all kinds of closeness. I don't praise closeness with
laypeople and renunciates. I do praise closeness with those lodgings
that are quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human
settlements, and fit for retreat."

When he said this, Venerable Moggallāna asked the Buddha, "Sir, how do
you briefly define a mendicant who is freed through the ending of
craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from
the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best
among gods and humans?"

"Take a mendicant who has heard: 'Nothing is worth insisting on.' When a
mendicant has heard that nothing is worth insisting on, they directly
know all things. Directly knowing all things, they completely understand
all things. Completely understanding all things, when they experience
any kind of feeling---pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral---they meditate
observing impermanence, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in those
feelings. Meditating in this way, they don't grasp at anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' That's how I briefly define a mendicant who is freed
through the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans."

</article>
<article id="an7.62">

#### [AN 7.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Don't Fear Good Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mettasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, don't fear good deeds. For 'good deeds' is a term for
happiness. I recall undergoing for a long time the likable, desirable,
and agreeable results of good deeds performed over a long time. I
developed a mind of love for seven years. As a result, for seven eons of
the cosmos contracting and expanding I didn't return to this world
again. As the cosmos contracted I went to the realm of streaming
radiance. As it expanded I was reborn in an empty mansion of Brahmā.

There I was Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished,
the universal seer, the wielder of power. I was Sakka, lord of gods,
thirty-six times. Many hundreds of times I was a king, a wheel-turning
monarch, a just and principled king. My dominion extended to all four
sides, I achieved stability in the country, and I possessed the seven
treasures. These were my seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the
horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the
seventh treasure. I had over a thousand sons who were valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of my enemies. After conquering this land
girt by sea, I reigned by principle, without rod or sword.

> See the result of good deeds,\
> of skillful deeds, for one seeking happiness.\
> I developed a mind of love\
> for seven years, mendicants.\
> For seven eons of expansion and contraction\
> I didn't return to this world again.
>
> As the world contracted\
> I went to the realm of streaming radiance.\
> And when it expanded\
> I went to an empty mansion of Brahmā.
>
> Seven times I was a Great Brahmā,\
> and at that time I was the wielder of power.\
> Thirty-six times I was lord of gods,\
> acting as ruler of the gods.
>
> Then I was king, a wheel-turning monarch,\
> lord of the Black Plum Tree Land.\
> An anointed aristocrat,\
> I was sovereign of all humans.
>
> Without rod or sword,\
> I conquered this land.\
> Through non-violent action\
> I guided it justly.
>
> After ruling this vast territory\
> by means of principle,\
> I was born in a rich family,\
> affluent and wealthy.
>
> It was replete with all sense pleasures,\
> and the seven treasures.\
> This was well taught by the Buddhas,\
> who bring the world together.
>
> This is the cause of greatness\
> by which one is called a lord of the land.\
> I was a majestic king,\
> with lots of property and assets.
>
> successful and glorious,\
> lord of the Black Plum Tree Land.\
> Who would not be inspired by this,\
> even someone of dark birth.
>
> Therefore someone who cares for their own welfare,\
> and wants to become the very best they can be,\
> should respect the true teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

</article>
<article id="an7.63">

#### [AN 7.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Wives ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhariyāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, where he sat on the
seat spread out.

Now at that time people in Anāthapiṇḍika's home were making a dreadful
racket. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed,
and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Householder, what's
with the people making that dreadful racket in your home? You'd think it
was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, that's my daughter-in-law Sujātā. She's been brought here from a
wealthy family. She doesn't obey her mother-in-law or father-in-law or
her husband. And she does not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the
Buddha."

Then the Buddha addressed Sujātā, saying, "Come, Sujātā."

"Yes, sir," she replied. She went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down
to one side. The Buddha said to her:

"Sujātā, a man can have seven kinds of wife. What seven? A wife like a
killer, a wife like a thief, a wife like a lord, a wife like a mother, a
wife like a sister, a wife like a friend, and a wife like a bondservant.
These are the kinds of wife that a man can have. Which one of these are
you?"

"Sir, I don't understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha has
said in brief. Please teach me this matter so I can understand the
detailed meaning."

"Well then, Sujātā, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," she replied. The Buddha said this:

> "With a mind full of hate and no kindness,\
> lusting for others, looking down on her husband,\
> she longs to murder him who paid the price for her.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a killer.
>
> A woman's husband earns his wealth\
> by focusing on a profession, trade, or farming.\
> And even if it's only a little, she wants to take it.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a thief.
>
> She's an idle glutton who doesn't want to work.\
> Her words are harsh, fierce, and rude.\
> She rules over him, though he rises early.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a lord.
>
> She's always caring and kind,\
> looking after her husband like a mother her child.\
> She keeps the wealth that he has earned secure.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a mother.
>
> She respects her husband\
> as a younger sister respects her elder.\
> Conscientious, she does what her husband says.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a sister.
>
> She's delighted to see him,\
> like one reunited with a long-lost friend.\
> She's well-raised, virtuous, and devoted.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a friend.
>
> She has no anger `<j>`{=html}when threatened with violence by the
> rod.\
> Without hate or anger,\
> she endures her husband and does what he says.\
> A man's wife of this sort\
> is called a wife and a bondservant. `</j>`{=html}
>
> The kinds of wives here called\
> killer, thief, and lord;\
> immoral, harsh, and lacking regard for others,\
> when their body breaks up they set course for hell.
>
> But the kinds of wives here called\
> mother, sister, friend, and bondservant;\
> steadfast in their own morality, `<j>`{=html}restrained for a long
> time,\
> when their body breaks up `<j>`{=html}they set course for a good
> place. `</j>`{=html}`</j>`{=html}

Sujātā, these are the seven kinds of wife that a man can have. Which one
of these are you?"

"Sir, from this day forth may the Buddha remember me as a wife like a
bondservant."

</article>
<article id="an7.64">

#### [AN 7.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Irritable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kodhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven things that please and assist an enemy happen
to an irritable woman or man. What seven?

Firstly, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they'd become ugly!' Why
is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have a beautiful enemy. An
irritable person, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, is ugly, even
though they're nicely bathed and anointed, with hair and beard dressed,
and wearing white clothes. This is the first thing that pleases and
assists an enemy which happens to an irritable woman or man.

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they'd sleep badly!'
Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have an enemy who sleeps
at ease. An irritable person, overcome and overwhelmed by anger, sleeps
badly, even though they sleep on a couch spread with woolen
covers---shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers---and
spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at
both ends. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they don't get all
they need!' Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have an enemy
who gets all they need. When an irritable person, overcome and
overwhelmed by anger, gets what they don't need they think, 'I've got
what I need.' When they get what they need they think, 'I've got what I
don't need.' When an angry person gets these things that are the exact
opposite of what they need, it's for their lasting harm and suffering.
This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they weren't
wealthy!' Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have an enemy
who is wealthy. When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by
anger, the rulers seize the legitimate wealth they've earned by their
efforts, built up with their own hands, gathered by the sweat of their
brow. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they weren't
famous!' Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have a famous
enemy. When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by anger,
any fame they have acquired by diligence falls to dust. This is the
fifth thing ...

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only they had no
friends!' Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to have an enemy
with friends. When a person is irritable, overcome and overwhelmed by
anger, their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin avoid them from
afar. This is the sixth thing ...

Furthermore, an enemy wishes for an enemy: 'If only, when their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell!' Why is that? Because an enemy doesn't like to
have an enemy who goes to a good place. When a person is irritable,
overcome and overwhelmed by anger, they do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. This is the
seventh thing that pleases and assists an enemy which happens to an
irritable woman or man.

These are the seven things that please and assist an enemy which happen
to an irritable woman or man.

> An irritable person is ugly\
> and they sleep badly.\
> When they get what they need,\
> they take it to be what they don't need.
>
> An angry person\
> kills with body or speech;\
> overcome with anger,\
> they lose their wealth.
>
> Mad with anger,\
> they fall into disgrace.\
> Family, friends, and loved ones\
> avoid an irritable person.
>
> Anger creates harm;\
> anger upsets the mind.\
> That person doesn't recognize\
> the danger that arises within.
>
> An angry person doesn't know the good.\
> An angry person doesn't see the truth.\
> When a person is beset by anger,\
> only blind darkness is left.
>
> An angry person destroys with ease\
> what was hard to build.\
> Afterwards, when the anger is spent,\
> they're tormented as if burnt by fire.
>
> Their look betrays their sulkiness\
> like a fire's smoky plume.\
> And when their anger flares up,\
> they make others angry.
>
> They have no conscience or prudence,\
> nor any respectful speech.\
> One overcome by anger\
> has no island refuge anywhere.
>
> The deeds that torment a man\
> are far from those that are good.\
> I'll explain them now;\
> listen to this, for it is the truth.
>
> An angry person slays their father;\
> their mother, too, they slay.\
> An angry person slays a saint;\
> a normal person, too, they slay.
>
> A man is raised by his mother,\
> who shows him the world.\
> But an angry ordinary person slays\
> even that good woman who gave him life.
>
> Like oneself, all sentient beings\
> hold themselves most dear.\
> But angry people kill themselves all kinds of ways,\
> distraught for many reasons.
>
> Some kill themselves with swords,\
> some, distraught, take poison.\
> Some hang themselves with rope,\
> or fling themselves down a mountain gorge.
>
> When they commit deeds of killing babes\
> and killing themselves,\
> they don't realize what they do,\
> for anger leads to their downfall.
>
> The snare of death in the form of anger\
> lies hidden in the heart.\
> You should cut it out by self-control,\
> by wisdom, energy, and right ideas.
>
> An astute person should cut out\
> this unskillful thing.\
> And they'd train in the teaching in just the same way,\
> not yielding to sulkiness.
>
> Free of anger, free of despair,\
> free of greed, with no more longing,\
> tamed, having given up anger,\
> the undefiled become fully quenched.

</article>

[]{#an7-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an7-mahavagga.xhtml_an7-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.65">

#### [AN 7.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Conscience and Prudence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Hirīottappasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when there is no conscience and prudence, one who lacks
conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is no conscience and prudence, a person who
lacks conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

When there is conscience and prudence, a person who has fulfilled
conscience and prudence has fulfilled a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled sense
restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is ethical conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has
fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. When there is right
immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital
condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge
and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has
fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled
disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is conscience and prudence, a person who has
fulfilled conscience and prudence has fulfilled a vital condition for
sense restraint. ... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and
dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom."

</article>
<article id="an7.66">

#### [AN 7.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Seven Suns ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattasūriyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, in Ambapālī's Mango Grove. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, conditions are impermanent. Conditions are unstable.
Conditions are unreliable. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Sineru, the king of mountains, is 84,000 leagues long and 84,000 leagues
wide. It sinks 84,000 leagues below the ocean and rises 84,000 leagues
above it. There comes a time when, after a very long period has
passed---many years, many hundreds, many thousands, many hundreds of
thousands of years---the heavens fail to rain. When this happens, the
plants and seeds, the herbs, grass, and big trees wither away and dry
up, and are no more. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable, so
unreliable. This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a second
sun appears. When this happens, the streams and pools wither away and
dry up, and are no more. So impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a third
sun appears. When this happens, the great rivers---the Ganges, Yamunā,
Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī---wither away and dry up, and are no more.
So impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a fourth
sun appears. When this happens, the great lakes from which the rivers
originate---the Anotattā, Sīhapapātā, Rathakārā, Kaṇṇamuṇḍā, Kuṇālā,
Chaddantā, and Mandākinī---wither away and dry up, and are no more. So
impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a fifth
sun appears. When this happens, the water in the ocean sinks by a
hundred leagues. It sinks by two, three, four, five, six, or even seven
hundred leagues. The water that remains in the ocean is only seven palm
trees deep. It's six, five, four, three, two, or even one palm tree
deep. The water that remains in the ocean is only seven fathoms deep.
It's six, five, four, three, two, one or even half a fathom deep. It's
waist high, knee high, or even ankle high. It's like in autumn, when the
heavens rain heavily and water remains here and there in the cows'
hoofprints. In the same way, water in the ocean remains here and there
in puddles like cows' hoofprints. When the fifth sun appears there's not
even enough water left in the great ocean for the tip of the toe. So
impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a sixth
sun appears. When this happens, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains smoke and smolder and give off fumes. It's like when a
potter's kiln is first kindled, and it smokes and smolders and gives off
fumes. In the same way, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains smoke and smolder and give off fumes. So impermanent are
conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a seventh
sun appears. When this happens, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains erupt in one burning mass of fire. And as they blaze and burn
the flames are swept by the wind as far as the Brahmā realm. Sineru the
king of mountains blazes and burns, crumbling as it's overcome by the
great fire. And meanwhile, mountain peaks a hundred leagues high, or
two, three, four, or five hundred leagues high disintegrate as they
burn. And when the great earth and Sineru the king of mountains blaze
and burn, no soot or ash is found. It's like when ghee or oil blaze and
burn, and neither ashes nor soot are found. In the same way, when the
great earth and Sineru the king of mountains blaze and burn, no soot or
ash is found. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable are conditions,
so unreliable are conditions. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Mendicants, who would ever think or believe that this earth and Sineru,
king of mountains, will burn and crumble and be no more, except for one
who has seen the truth?

Once upon a time, there was a teacher called Sunetta. He was a religious
founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had many
hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in the company
of Brahmā. Those who totally understood Sunetta's teachings were---when
their body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, the company
of Brahmā. Of those who didn't totally understand Sunetta's teachings,
some---when their body broke up, after death---were reborn in the
company of the gods who control what is imagined by others. Some were
reborn in the company of the gods who love to imagine, some with the
joyful gods, some with the gods of Yama, some with the gods of the
thirty-three, and some with the gods of the four great kings. Some were
reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or
householders.

Then the teacher Sunetta thought: 'It's not proper for me to be reborn
in the next life in exactly the same place as my disciples. Why don't I
further develop love?'

Then Sunetta developed love for seven years. Having done so he did not
return to this world for seven eons of cosmic expansion and contraction.
As the cosmos contracted he went to the realm of streaming radiance. As
it expanded he was reborn in an empty mansion of Brahmā. There he was
Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the
universal seer, the wielder of power. He was Sakka, lord of gods,
thirty-six times. Many hundreds of times he was a king, a wheel-turning
monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extended to all four
sides, he achieved stability in the country, and he possessed the seven
treasures. He had over a thousand sons who were valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigned by principle, without rod or sword. Yet even though
Sunetta lived so long, he was not exempt from rebirth, old age, and
death. He was not exempt from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress, I say.

Why is that? Because of not understanding and not penetrating four
things. What four? Noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These
noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and
comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the
conduit to rebirth is ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Ethics, immersion, and wisdom,\
> and the supreme freedom:\
> these things have been understood\
> by Gotama the renowned.
>
> And so the Buddha, having insight,\
> explained this teaching to the mendicants.\
> The Teacher has made an end of suffering;\
> seeing clearly, he is quenched."

</article>
<article id="an7.67">

#### [AN 7.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Citadel ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nagaropamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a king's frontier citadel is well provided with seven
essentials and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without
trouble or difficulty, it is then called a king's frontier citadel that
cannot be overrun by external foes and enemies.

With what seven essentials is a citadel well provided?

Firstly, a citadel has a pillar with deep foundations, firmly embedded,
imperturbable and unshakable. This is the first essential with which a
king's frontier citadel is well provided, to defend those within and
repel those outside.

Furthermore, a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide. This is the
second essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide. This is
the third essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and
hand-held. This is the fourth essential ...

Furthermore, many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel, such as
elephant riders, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants,
food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes,
leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. This is the fifth
essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
intelligent. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in. This is
the sixth essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a wall that's high and wide, covered with
plaster. This is the seventh essential with which a king's frontier
citadel is well provided, to defend those within and repel those
outside.

With these seven essentials a citadel is well provided.

What are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without
trouble or difficulty?

Firstly, a king's frontier citadel has much hay, wood, and water stored
up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel
those outside.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored
up for those within.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much food such as sesame,
green gram, and black gram stored up for those within.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much medicine---ghee, butter,
oil, honey, molasses, and salt---stored up for the enjoyment, relief,
and comfort of those within and to repel those outside.

These are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without
trouble or difficulty.

When a king's frontier citadel is well provided with seven essentials
and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without trouble or
difficulty, it is then called a king's frontier citadel that cannot be
overrun by external foes and enemies. In the same way, when a noble
disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that belong to
the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they
are then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra, who
cannot be overrun by the Wicked One. What are the seven good qualities
that they have?

Just as a king's frontier citadel has a pillar with deep foundations,
firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable, to defend those within
and repel those outside, in the same way a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' A noble disciple with faith as their
pillar gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up
the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves
pure. This is the first good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide, in the same way a
noble disciple has a conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct
by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any
bad, unskillful qualities. A noble disciple with a conscience as their
moat gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the
blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure.
This is the second good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide, in the same
way a noble disciple is prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to
acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. A noble disciple with prudence
as their patrol path gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful,
they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep
themselves pure. This is the third good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and
hand-held, in the same way a noble disciple is very learned. They
remember and keep what they've learned. These teachings are good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's entirely full and
pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them,
reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them
theoretically. A noble disciple with learning as their weapon gives up
the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy
and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the
fourth good quality they have.

Just as many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel ... in the same
way a noble disciple is energetic. They live with energy roused up for
giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They
are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to
developing skillful qualities. A noble disciple with energy as their
armed forces gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they
give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep
themselves pure. This is the fifth good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
intelligent, who keeps strangers out and lets known people in, in the
same way a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
A noble disciple with mindfulness as their gatekeeper gives up the
unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and
develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the sixth
good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a wall that's high and wide, covered with plaster,
to defend those within and repel those outside, in the same way a noble
disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which
is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. A
noble disciple with wisdom as their wall gives up the unskillful and
develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the
blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the seventh good
quality they have. These are the seven good qualities that they have.

And what are the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present
life that belong to the higher mind---that they get when they want,
without trouble or difficulty? Just as a king's frontier citadel has
much hay, wood, and water stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and
comfort of those within and to repel those outside, in the same way a
noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and
comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored up, in
the same way, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a noble disciple enters and remains in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This
is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon
extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much food such as sesame, green
gram, and black gram stored up, in the same way with the fading away of
rapture, a noble disciple enters and remains in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is for their own enjoyment,
relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much medicine---ghee, butter, oil,
honey, molasses, and salt---stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and
comfort of those within and to repel those outside, in the same way,
giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a
noble disciple enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is for
their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon
extinguishment. These are the four absorptions---blissful meditations in
the present life that belong to the higher mind---which they get when
they want, without trouble or difficulty.

When a noble disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that belong to
the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they
are then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra, who
cannot be overrun by the Wicked One."

</article>
<article id="an7.68">

#### [AN 7.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Who Knows the Teachings ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammaññūsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A mendicant with seven qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world. What seven? It's when a mendicant knows the teachings, knows
the meaning, has self-knowledge, knows moderation, knows the right time,
knows assemblies, and knows people high and low.

And how is a mendicant one who knows the teachings? It's when a
mendicant knows the teachings: statements, mixed prose & verse,
discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past
lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. If a mendicant did not know
these teachings, they would not be called 'one who knows the teachings'.
But because they do know these teachings, they are called 'one who knows
the teachings'. Such is the one who knows the teachings.

And how are they one who knows the meaning? It's when a mendicant knows
the meaning of this or that statement: 'This is what that statement
means; that is what this statement means.' If a mendicant did not know
the meaning of this or that statement, they would not be called 'one who
knows the meaning'. But because they do know the meaning of this or that
statement, they are called 'one who knows the meaning'. Such is the one
who knows the teachings and the one who knows the meaning.

And how are they one who has self-knowledge? It's when a mendicant has
self-knowledge: 'This is the extent of my faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence.' If a mendicant did not have
self-knowledge, they would not be called 'one who has self-knowledge'.
But because they do have self-knowledge, they are called 'one who has
self-knowledge'. Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who
knows the meaning, and the one who has self-knowledge.

And how are they one who knows moderation? It's when a mendicant knows
moderation when receiving robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. If a mendicant did not know moderation, they
would not be called 'one who knows moderation'. But because they do know
moderation, they are called 'one who knows moderation'. Such is the one
who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has
self-knowledge, and the one who knows moderation.

And how are they one who knows the right time? It's when a mendicant
knows the right time: 'This is the time for recitation; this is the time
for questioning; this is the time for meditation; this is the time for
retreat.' If a mendicant did not know the right time, they would not be
called 'one who knows the right time'. But because they do know the
right time, they are called 'one who knows the right time'. Such is the
one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who
has self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, and the one who knows
the right time.

And how are they one who knows assemblies? It's when a mendicant knows
assemblies: 'This is an assembly of aristocrats, of brahmins, of
householders, or of ascetics. This one should be approached in this way.
This is how to stand, to act, to sit, to speak, or to stay silent when
there.' If a mendicant did not know assemblies, they would not be called
'one who knows assemblies'. But because they do know assemblies, they
are called 'one who knows assemblies'. Such is the one who knows the
teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has
self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, the one who knows the
right time, and the one who knows assemblies.

And how are they one who knows people high and low? It's when a
mendicant understands people in terms of pairs. Two people: one likes to
see the noble ones, one does not. The person who doesn't like to see the
noble ones is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does like to
see the noble ones is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people like to see the noble ones: one likes to hear the true
teaching, one does not. The person who doesn't like to hear the true
teaching is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does like to
hear the true teaching is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people like to hear the true teaching: one actively listens to the
teaching, one does not. The person who doesn't actively listen to the
teaching is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does actively
listen to the teaching is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people actively listen to the teaching: one remembers the teaching
they've heard, one does not. The person who doesn't remember the
teaching they've heard is reprehensible in that respect. The person who
does remember the teaching they've heard is praiseworthy in that
respect.

Two people remember the teaching they've heard: one reflects on the
meaning of the teachings they have remembered, one does not. The person
who does not reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have
remembered is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does reflect
on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered is praiseworthy in
that respect.

Two people reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered:
one understands the meaning and the teaching and practices accordingly,
one understands the meaning and the teaching but does not practice
accordingly. The person who understands the meaning and the teaching but
does not practice accordingly is reprehensible in that respect. The
person who understands the meaning and the teaching and practices
accordingly is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people understand the meaning and the teaching and practice
accordingly: one practices to benefit themselves but not others, and one
practices to benefit both themselves and others. The person who
practices to benefit themselves but not others is reprehensible in that
respect. The person who practices to benefit both themselves and others
is praiseworthy in that respect.

That's how a mendicant understands people in terms of pairs.

That's how a mendicant is one who knows people high and low. A mendicant
with these seven qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world."

</article>
<article id="an7.69">

#### [AN 7.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shady Orchid Tree ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pāricchattakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when the leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree belonging to the
gods of the thirty-three turn brown, the gods are elated. They think:
'Now the leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree have turned brown! It won't be
long until they fall.'

When the leaves have fallen, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the
leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree have fallen. It won't be long until its
foliage starts to regrow.'

When the foliage starts to regrow, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now
the foliage of the Shady Orchid Tree has started to regrow. It won't be
long until it's ready to grow flowers and leaves separately.'

When it's ready to grow flowers and leaves separately, the gods are
elated. They think: 'Now the Shady Orchid Tree is ready to grow flowers
and leaves separately. It won't be long until buds start to form.'

When the buds start to form, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the
buds of the Shady Orchid Tree have started to form. It won't be long
until the buds burst.'

When the buds have burst, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the buds
of the Shady Orchid Tree have burst. It won't be long until it fully
blossoms.'

When the Shady Orchid Tree of the gods of the thirty-three has fully
blossomed, the gods are elated. For four heavenly months they amused
themselves at the root of the tree, supplied and provided with the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. When the Shady Orchid Tree has fully
blossomed, its radiance spreads for fifty leagues, while its fragrance
wafts for a hundred leagues. Such is the majesty of the Shady Orchid
Tree.

In the same way, when a noble disciple plans to go forth from the lay
life to homelessness, they're like the Shady Orchid Tree when its leaves
turn brown.

When a noble disciple shaves off their hair and beard, dresses in ocher
robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, they're like
the Shady Orchid Tree when its leaves fall.

When a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected, they're like the Shady Orchid Tree when
its foliage starts to regrow.

When, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a
noble disciple enters and remains in the second absorption, which has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected, they're like
the Shady Orchid Tree when it's ready to grow flowers and leaves
separately.

When, with the fading away of rapture, a noble disciple enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss', they're
like the Shady Orchid Tree when its buds start to form.

When, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, a noble disciple enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness, they're
like the Shady Orchid Tree when its buds burst.

When a noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, they're like
the Shady Orchid tree when it fully blossoms.

At that time the earth gods raise the cry: 'This venerable named
so-and-so, from such-and-such village or town, the pupil of the
venerable named so-and-so, went forth from the lay life to homelessness.
They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.'

Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings ...
the gods of the thirty-three ... the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods
... the gods who love to imagine ... the gods who control what is
imagined by others ... the gods of Brahmā's host raise the cry: 'This
venerable named so-and-so, from such-and-such village or town, the pupil
of the venerable named so-and-so, went forth from the lay life to
homelessness. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.' And so at that
moment, that second, that hour, the cry soars up to the Brahmā realm.
Such is the majesty of a mendicant who has ended the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an7.70">

#### [AN 7.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Honor ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sakkaccasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then as Venerable Sāriputta was in private retreat this thought came to
his mind, "What should a mendicant honor and respect and rely on, to
give up the unskillful and develop the skillful?"

Then he thought, "A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on the
Teacher ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... the training ... immersion
... diligence ... A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on
hospitality, to give up the unskillful and develop the skillful."

Then he thought, "These qualities are pure and bright in me. Why don't I
go and tell them to the Buddha? Then these qualities will not only be
purified in me, but will be better known as purified. Suppose a man were
to acquire a gold ingot, pure and bright. They'd think, 'My gold ingot
is pure and bright. Why don't I take it to show the smiths? Then it will
not only be purified, but will be better known as purified.' In the same
way, these qualities are pure and bright in me. Why don't I go and tell
them to the Buddha? Then these qualities will not only be purified in
me, but will be better known as purified."

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat and went to
the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told the Buddha of his
thoughts while on retreat.

"Good, good, Sāriputta! A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on
the Teacher, to give up the unskillful and develop the skillful. A
mendicant should honor and respect and rely on the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... immersion ... diligence ... A mendicant
should honor and respect and rely on hospitality, to give up the
unskillful and develop the skillful."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't
respect the Teacher to respect the teaching. A mendicant who disrespects
the Teacher disrespects the teaching.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher
and the teaching to respect the Saṅgha. A mendicant who disrespects the
Teacher and the teaching disrespects the Saṅgha.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, and the Saṅgha to respect the training. A mendicant who
disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha disrespects the
training.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, and the training to respect immersion. A
mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, and the
training disrespects immersion.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion to respect
diligence. A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, and immersion disrespects diligence.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence to
respect hospitality. A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the
teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence disrespects
hospitality.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
disrespect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, and diligence respects hospitality.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who respects the Teacher to respect
the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, and diligence respects hospitality.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher
to respect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, and diligence disrespects hospitality.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
disrespect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, and diligence respects hospitality.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
respect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, immersion, and diligence respects hospitality.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

</article>
<article id="an7.71">

#### [AN 7.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Committed to Development ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhāvanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they
might wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they're
undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. But she
had not properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if
that chicken might wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the
eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!' Still they can't
break out and hatch safely. Why is that? Because she has not properly
sat on them to keep them warm and incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they
might wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they're
undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold path.

When a mendicant is committed to development, they might not wish: 'If
only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!' Even so,
their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. Why is that? You
should say: 'It's because they are developed.' Developed in what? The
four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four
bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she
properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if that
chicken doesn't wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell
with their claws and beak and hatch safely!' Still they can break out
and hatch safely. Why is that? Because she properly sat on them to keep
them warm and incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they
might not wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they are
developed.' Developed in what? The four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five
faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble
eightfold path.

Suppose a carpenter or their apprentice sees the marks of his fingers
and thumb on the handle of his adze. They don't know how much of the
handle was worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much previously.
They just know what has been worn away. In the same way, when a
mendicant is committed to development, they don't know how much of the
defilements were worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much
previously. They just know what has been worn away.

Suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with ropes. For six
months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold season it was
hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by wind and sun.
When the clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would readily collapse
and rot away. In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to
development their fetters readily collapse and rot away."

</article>
<article id="an7.72">

#### [AN 7.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Great Mass of Fire ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggikkhandhopamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was wandering in the
land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

While walking along the road, at a certain spot he saw a great mass of
fire burning, blazing, and glowing. Seeing this he left the road, sat at
the root of a tree on a seat spread out, and addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants, do you see that great mass of fire burning, blazing, and
glowing?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to sit or lie down
embracing that great mass of fire? Or to sit or lie down embracing a
girl of the aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender
hands and feet?"

"Sir, it would be much better to sit or lie down embracing a girl of the
aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and
feet. For it would be painful to sit or lie down embracing that great
mass of fire."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man---of bad qualities, filthy, with
suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual
practitioner, though claiming to be one, rotten inside, festering, and
depraved---to sit or lie down embracing that great mass of fire. Why is
that? Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his
body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

But when such an unethical man sits or lies down embracing a girl of the
aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and
feet, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks
up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
twist a tough horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it so that
it cuts through your outer skin, your inner skin, your flesh, sinews,
and bones, until it reaches your marrow and keeps pushing? Or to consent
to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders bowing down to
you?"

"Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders bowing down. For it would be painful to have a
strong man twist a tough horse-hair rope around your shins and tighten
it so that it cut through the outer skin until it reached the marrow and
kept pushing."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man twist a tough
horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it until it reached the
marrow and kept pushing. Why is that? Because that might result in death
or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not
cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders bowing down, that brings him lasting harm
and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled sword? Or to consent to
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering you with
joined palms?"

"Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders revering you with joined palms. For it would be
painful to have a strong man stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled
sword."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man stab him in the chest
with a sharp, oiled sword. Why is that? Because that might result in
death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would
not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do
aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering him with joined palms,
that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up,
after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing?
Or to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith
by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be
painful to have a strong man wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron,
burning, blazing, and glowing."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man wrap him up in a
red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing. Why is that?
Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body
breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an unethical
man enjoys the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering.
When his body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
force your mouth open with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot
copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that burns your lips, mouth,
tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out below dragging your
entrails? Or to enjoy almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy almsfood given in faith by
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be
painful to have a strong man force your mouth open with a hot iron spike
and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that
burns your lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out
below dragging your entrails."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man force his mouth open
with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning,
blazing, and glowing, that burns his lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and
stomach before coming out below with his entrails. Why is that? Because
that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up,
after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an unethical man enjoy
almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or
householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body
breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
grab you by the head or shoulders and make you sit or lie down on
red-hot iron bed or seat? Or to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it
would be painful to have a strong man grab you by the head or shoulders
and make you sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him by the head
or shoulders and make him sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat.
Why is that? Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when
his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an
unethical man enjoys the use of beds and seats given in faith by
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him
lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he's
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
grab you, turn you upside down, and shove you in a red-hot copper pot,
burning, blazing, and glowing, where you're seared in boiling scum, and
swept up and down and round and round. Or to enjoy the use of dwellings
given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of dwellings given in
faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it
would be painful to have a strong man grab you, turn you upside down,
and shove you in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing,
where you're seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down and round and
round."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him, turn him
upside down, and shove him in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing,
and glowing, where he's seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down
and round and round. Why is that? Because that might result in death or
deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not
cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. But when such an unethical man enjoys the use of dwellings given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that
brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after
death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

So you should train like this: 'Our use of robes, almsfood, lodgings,
and medicines and supplies for the sick shall be of great fruit and
benefit for those who offered them. And our going forth will not be
wasted, but will be fruitful and fertile.' That's how you should train.
Considering what is good for yourself, mendicants, is quite enough for
you to persist with diligence. Considering what is good for others is
quite enough for you to persist with diligence. Considering what is good
for both is quite enough for you to persist with diligence."

That is what the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken,
sixty monks spewed hot blood from their mouths. Sixty mendicants
resigned the training and returned to a lesser life, saying:

"It's too hard, Blessed One! It's just too hard!" And sixty monks were
freed from defilements by not grasping.

</article>
<article id="an7.73">

#### [AN 7.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Sunetta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sunettasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a Teacher called Sunetta. He
was a religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He
had many hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in
the company of Brahmā. Those lacking confidence in Sunetta were---when
their body broke up, after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. Those full of confidence in Sunetta
were---when their body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.

Once upon a time there was a teacher called Mūgapakkha ... Aranemi ...
Kuddālaka ... Hatthipāla ... Jotipāla ... Araka. He was a religious
founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had many
hundreds of disciples. He taught them the way to rebirth in the company
of Brahmā. Those lacking confidence in Araka were---when their body
broke up, after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. Those full of confidence in Araka were---when their
body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

What do you think, mendicants? If someone with malicious intent were to
abuse and insult these seven teachers with their hundreds of followers,
would they not create much wickedness?"

"Yes, sir."

"They would indeed. But someone who abuses and insults a single person
accomplished in view with malicious intent creates even more wickedness.
Why is that? I say that any injury done by those outside of the Buddhist
community does not compare with what is done to one's own spiritual
companions.

So you should train like this: 'We will have no malicious intent for our
spiritual companions.' That's how you should train."

</article>
<article id="an7.74">

#### [AN 7.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Araka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a Teacher called Araka. He was
a religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had
many hundreds of disciples, and he taught them like this: 'Brahmins,
life as a human is short, brief, and fleeting, full of suffering and
distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the
spiritual life, for no-one born can escape death.

It's like a drop of dew on a grass tip. When the sun comes up it quickly
evaporates and doesn't last long. In the same way, life as a human is
like a dewdrop. It's brief and fleeting, full of suffering and distress.
Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the spiritual life,
for no-one born can escape death.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily. The bubbles quickly vanish and
don't last long. In the same way, life as a human is like a bubble. ...

It's like a line drawn in water. It vanishes quickly and doesn't last
long. In the same way, life as a human is like a line drawn in water.
...

It's like a mountain river traveling far, flowing fast, carrying all
before it. It doesn't turn back---not for a moment, a second, an
hour---but runs, rolls, and flows on. In the same way, life as a human
is like a mountain river. ...

It's like a strong man who has formed a glob of spit on the tip of his
tongue. He could easily spit it out. In the same way, life as a human is
like a glob of spit. ...

Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had been heated all day. If you
tossed a scrap of meat in, it would quickly vanish and not last long. In
the same way, life as a human is like a scrap of meat. ...

It's like a cow being led to the slaughterhouse. With every step she
comes closer to the slaughter, closer to death. In the same way, life as
a human is like a cow being slaughtered. It's brief and fleeting, full
of suffering and distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and
lead the spiritual life, for no-one born can escape death.'

Now, mendicants, at that time human beings had a life span of 60,000
years. Girls could be married at 500 years of age. And human beings only
had six afflictions: cold, heat, hunger, thirst, and the need to
defecate and urinate. But even though humans were so long-lived with so
few afflictions, Araka still taught in this way: 'Life as a human is
short, brief, and fleeting, full of suffering and distress. Be
thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the spiritual life, for
no-one born can escape death.'

These days it'd be right to say: 'Life as a human is short, brief, and
fleeting, full of suffering and distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do
what's good and lead the spiritual life, for no-one born can escape
death.' For these days a long life is a hundred years or a little more.
Living for a hundred years, there are just three hundred seasons, a
hundred each of the winter, summer, and rains. Living for three hundred
seasons, there are just twelve hundred months, four hundred in each of
the winter, summer, and rains. Living for twelve hundred months, there
are just twenty-four hundred fortnights, eight hundred in each of the
winter, summer, and rains. Living for 2,400 fortnights, there are just
36,000 days, 12,000 in each of the summer, winter, and rains. Living for
36,000 days, you just eat 72,000 meals, 24,000 in each of the summer,
winter, and rains, including when you're suckling at the breast, and
when you're prevented from eating.

Things that prevent you from eating include anger, pain, sickness,
sabbath, or being unable to get food. So mendicants, for a human being
with a hundred years life span I have counted the life span, the limit
of the life span, the seasons, the years, the months, the fortnights,
the nights, the days, the meals, and the things that prevent them from
eating. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants
what's best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here
are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be
negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

</article>

[]{#an7-vinayavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Monastic Law {#an7-vinayavagga.xhtml_an7-vinayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.75">

#### [AN 7.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Expert in the Monastic Law (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavinayadharasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities is an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.76">

#### [AN 7.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Expert in the Monastic Law (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavinayadharasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in
detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules
and accompanying material. They get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. They realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.77">

#### [AN 7.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Expert in the Monastic Law (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavinayadharasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're firm and unfaltering in the training. They
get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities is an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.78">

#### [AN 7.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Expert in the Monastic Law (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthavinayadharasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities is
an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.79">

#### [AN 7.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavinayadharasobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places; seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities shines as an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.80">

#### [AN 7.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavinayadharasobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in
detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules
and accompanying material. They get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. They realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities shines as an expert
in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.81">

#### [AN 7.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyavinayadharasobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're firm and unfaltering in the training. They
get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities shines as an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.82">

#### [AN 7.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthavinayadharasobhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities
shines as an expert in the monastic law."

</article>
<article id="an7.83">

#### [AN 7.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teacher's Instructions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Satthusāsanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Upāli, you might know that certain things don't lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. Categorically, you should remember these things as not
the teaching, not the training, and not the Teacher's instructions. You
might know that certain things do lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
Categorically, you should remember these things as the teaching, the
training, and the Teacher's instructions."

</article>
<article id="an7.84">

#### [AN 7.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Settlement of Disciplinary Issues ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhikaraṇasamathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven principles for the settlement of any
disciplinary issues that might arise. What seven? Resolution
face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through recollection to be
granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be granted. Acting
according to what has been admitted. Majority decision. Further penalty.
Covering over as if with grass. These are the seven principles for the
settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise."

</article>

[]{#an7-samanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Ascetics {#an7-samanavagga.xhtml_an7-samanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.85">

#### [AN 7.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Mendicant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhikkhusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of breaking seven things that you become a
mendicant. What seven? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, greed, hate, delusion, and conceit. It's
because of breaking these seven things that you become a mendicant."

</article>
<article id="an7.86">

#### [AN 7.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Ascetic ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of quelling seven things that you become an
ascetic ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.87">

#### [AN 7.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Brahmin ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of barring out seven things that you become a
brahmin ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.88">

#### [AN 7.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Scholar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sottiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of scouring off seven things that you become a
scholar ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.89">

#### [AN 7.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bathed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nhātakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of bathing off seven things that you become a
bathed initiate ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.90">

#### [AN 7.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Knowledge Master ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vedagūsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because of knowing seven things that you become a
knowledge master ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.91">

#### [AN 7.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Noble One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's because seven foes have been nobbled that you become a
noble one ..."

</article>
<article id="an7.92">

#### [AN 7.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Perfected One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Arahāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it's by being impeccably remote from seven things that you
become a perfected one. What seven? Substantialist view, doubt,
misapprehension of precepts and observances, greed, hate, delusion, and
conceit. It's because of being impeccably remote from these seven things
that you become a perfected one."

</article>
<article id="an7.93">

#### [AN 7.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asaddhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven bad qualities. What seven? Someone is
faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless. These are the seven bad qualities."

</article>
<article id="an7.94">

#### [AN 7.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these seven good qualities. What seven? Someone
is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and
wise. These are the seven good qualities."

</article>

[]{#an7-ahuneyyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Worthy of Offerings {#an7-ahuneyyavagga.xhtml_an7-ahuneyyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.95">

#### [AN 7.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Impermanence in the Eye ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye.
They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence. Constantly,
continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind and fathom
with wisdom. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the first person
who is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality,
worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms,
and is the supreme field of merit for the world.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. ...
Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly the same
time. This is the second person who is worthy of offerings ...

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. ...
With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between
one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. ... This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

</article>
<article id="an7.96-614">

#### [AN 7.96--614]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Suffering in the Eye, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings ... What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing suffering in the eye. ...
observing not-self in the eye. ... observing ending in the eye. ...
observing vanishing in the eye. ... observing fading away in the eye.
... observing cessation in the eye. ... observing letting go in the eye.
...

ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ...

sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas ...

eye consciousness ... ear consciousness ... nose consciousness ...
tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness ...

eye contact ... ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact ... body
contact ... mind contact ...

feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling
born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born
of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact ...

perception of sights ... perception of sounds ... perception of smells
... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception of
ideas ...

intention regarding sights ... intention regarding sounds ... intention
regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention regarding
touches ... intention regarding ideas ...

craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for smells ...
craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for ideas ...

thoughts about sights ... thoughts about sounds ... thoughts about
smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ... thoughts
about ideas ...

considerations regarding sights ... considerations regarding sounds ...
considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding tastes ...
considerations regarding touches ... considerations regarding ideas ...

meditates observing impermanence in the five aggregates ... the
aggregate of form ... the aggregate of feeling ... the aggregate of
perception ... the aggregate of choices ... the aggregate of
consciousness ... meditates observing suffering ... not-self ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... letting go ..."

</article>

[]{#an7-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an7-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an7-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an7.615">

#### [AN 7.615]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The awakening factor of mindfulness ... the awakening factor
of equanimity. These seven things should be developed for insight into
greed."

</article>
<article id="an7.616">

#### [AN 7.616]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The perception of impermanence, the perception of not-self,
the perception of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the perception
of giving up, the perception of fading away, and the perception of
cessation. These seven things should be developed for insight into
greed."

</article>
<article id="an7.617">

#### [AN 7.617]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food,
dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in
impermanence, and not-self in suffering. These seven things should be
developed for insight into greed."

</article>
<article id="an7.618-644">

#### [AN 7.618--644]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... For the letting go of greed, these seven things should be
developed."

</article>
<article id="an7.645-1124">

#### [AN 7.645--1124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... letting go of negligence these seven things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Sevens is finished.

</article>

[]{#an8.xhtml}

# The Book of the Eights {#an8.xhtml_an8 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an8-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an8-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an8-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Love {#an8-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an8-mettavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.1">

#### [AN 8.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Love ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mettāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, you can expect eight benefits when the heart's release by
love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a
basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented. What eight? You
sleep at ease. You wake happily. You don't have bad dreams. Humans love
you. Non-humans love you. Deities protect you. You can't be harmed by
fire, poison, or blade. If you don't reach any higher, you'll be reborn
in a Brahmā realm. You can expect these eight benefits when the heart's
release by love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a
vehicle and a basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented.

> A mindful one who develops\
> limitless love\
> weakens the fetters,\
> seeing the ending of attachments.
>
> Loving just one creature with a hateless heart\
> makes you a true person.\
> Sympathetic for all creatures,\
> a noble one creates abundant merit.
>
> The royal potentates conquered this land\
> and traveled around sponsoring sacrifices---\
> horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,\
> the sacrifices of the 'casting of the yoke-pin', the 'royal soma
> drinking', and the 'unimpeded'.
>
> These are not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the mind developed with love,\
> as all the constellations of stars\
> aren't worth a sixteenth part of the moon's light.
>
> Don't kill or cause others to kill,\
> don't conquer or encourage others to conquer,\
> with love for all sentient beings,\
> you'll have no enmity for anyone."

</article>
<article id="an8.2">

#### [AN 8.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are eight causes and reasons that lead to acquiring
the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life, and to its increase,
growth, and full development once it has been acquired. What eight?

It's when a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher or a spiritual
companion in a teacher's role. And they set up a keen sense of
conscience and prudence for them, with warmth and respect. This is the
first cause.

When a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion
in a teacher's role---with a keen sense of conscience and prudence for
them, with warmth and respect---from time to time they go and ask them
questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?' Those
venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is the second cause.

After hearing that teaching they perfect withdrawal of both body and
mind. This is the third cause.

A mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in
the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is the
fourth cause.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is the fifth cause.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is the
sixth cause.

When in the Saṅgha they don't engage in motley talk or low talk. Either
they talk on Dhamma, or they invite someone else to do so, or they
respect noble silence. This is the seventh cause.

They meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates.
'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form.
Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of
feeling. Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is
the ending of perception. Such are choices, such is the origin of
choices, such is the ending of choices. Such is consciousness, such is
the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' This
is the eighth cause.

Their spiritual companions esteem them: 'This venerable lives relying on
the Teacher or a spiritual companion in a teacher's role. They set up a
keen sense of conscience and prudence for them, with warmth and respect.
Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This quality leads to fondness,
respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

'This venerable lives relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion in
a teacher's role, and from time to time they go and ask them questions
... Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This quality also leads to
fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

'After hearing that teaching they perfect withdrawal of both body and
mind. Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This quality also leads to
fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

'This venerable is ethical ... Clearly this venerable knows and sees.'
This quality also leads to fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and
unity.

'This venerable is very learned, remembering and keeping what they've
learned. ... Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This quality also
leads to fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

'This venerable lives with energy roused up ... Clearly this venerable
knows and sees.' This quality also leads to fondness, respect, esteem,
harmony, and unity.

'When in the Saṅgha they don't engage in motley talk or low talk. Either
they talk on Dhamma, or they invite someone else to do so, or they
respect noble silence. Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This
quality also leads to fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

'They meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates.
... Clearly this venerable knows and sees.' This quality also leads to
fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

These are the eight causes and reasons that lead to acquiring the wisdom
fundamental to the spiritual life, and to its increase, growth, and full
development once it has been acquired."

</article>
<article id="an8.3">

#### [AN 8.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disliked (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaappiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is disliked and
disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What eight? It's when a mendicant praises the disliked and criticizes
the liked. They desire material things and honor. They lack conscience
and prudence. They have corrupt wishes and wrong view. A mendicant with
these eight qualities is disliked and disapproved by their spiritual
companions, not respected or admired.

A mendicant with eight qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, and respected and admired. What eight? It's when a
mendicant doesn't praise the disliked and criticize the liked. They
don't desire material things and honor. They have conscience and
prudence. They have few desires and right view. A mendicant with these
eight qualities is liked and approved by their spiritual companions, and
respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an8.4">

#### [AN 8.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disliked (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaappiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is disliked and
disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What eight? It's when a mendicant desires material things, honor, and to
be looked up to. They know neither moderation nor the proper time. Their
conduct is impure, they talk a lot, and they insult and abuse their
spiritual companions. A mendicant with these eight qualities is disliked
and disapproved by their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A mendicant with eight qualities is liked and approved by their
spiritual companions, and respected and admired. What eight? It's when a
mendicant doesn't desire material things, honor, and to be looked up to.
They know moderation and the proper time. Their conduct is pure, they
don't talk a lot, and they don't insult and abuse their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these eight qualities is liked and approved
by their spiritual companions, and respected and admired."

</article>
<article id="an8.5">

#### [AN 8.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worldly Conditions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamalokadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and
the world revolves around the eight worldly conditions. What eight? Gain
and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure and pain. These
eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world
revolves around these eight worldly conditions.

> Gain and loss, fame and disgrace,\
> blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.\
> These qualities among people are impermanent,\
> transient, and perishable.
>
> An intelligent and mindful person knows these things,\
> seeing that they're perishable.\
> Desirable things don't disturb their mind,\
> nor are they repelled by the undesirable.
>
> Both favoring and opposing\
> are cleared and ended, they are no more.\
> Knowing the stainless, sorrowless state,\
> they who have gone beyond rebirth `<j>`{=html}understand rightly."
> `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an8.6">

#### [AN 8.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worldly Conditions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyalokadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and
the world revolves around the eight worldly conditions. What eight? Gain
and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure and pain. These
eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world
revolves around these eight worldly conditions.

An unlearned ordinary person encounters gain and loss, fame and
disgrace, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain. And so does a learned
noble disciple. What, then, is the difference between a learned noble
disciple and an ordinary unlearned person?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person encounters gain. They don't
reflect: 'I've encountered this gain. It's impermanent, suffering, and
perishable.' They don't truly understand it. They encounter loss ...
fame ... disgrace ... blame ... praise ... pleasure ... pain. They don't
reflect: 'I've encountered this pain. It's impermanent, suffering, and
perishable.' They don't truly understand it.

So gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, and pleasure and
pain occupy their mind. They favor gain and oppose loss. They favor fame
and oppose disgrace. They favor praise and oppose blame. They favor
pleasure and oppose pain. Being so full of favoring and opposing,
they're not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

A learned noble disciple encounters gain. They reflect: 'I've
encountered this gain. It's impermanent, suffering, and perishable.'
They truly understand it. They encounter loss ... fame ... disgrace ...
blame ... praise ... pleasure ... pain. They reflect: 'I've encountered
this pain. It's impermanent, suffering, and perishable.' They truly
understand it.

So gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, and pleasure and
pain don't occupy their mind. They don't favor gain or oppose loss. They
don't favor fame or oppose disgrace. They don't favor praise or oppose
blame. They don't favor pleasure or oppose pain. Having given up
favoring and opposing, they're freed from rebirth, old age, and death,
from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed
from suffering, I say. This is the difference between a learned noble
disciple and an unlearned ordinary person.

> Gain and loss, fame and disgrace,\
> blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.\
> These qualities among people are impermanent,\
> transient, and perishable.
>
> An intelligent and mindful person knows these things,\
> seeing that they're perishable.\
> Desirable things don't disturb their mind,\
> nor are they repelled by the undesirable.
>
> Both favoring and opposing\
> are cleared and ended, they are no more.\
> Knowing the stainless, sorrowless state,\
> they who have gone beyond rebirth `<j>`{=html}understand rightly."
> `</j>`{=html}

</article>
<article id="an8.7">

#### [AN 8.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Devadatta's Failure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadattavipattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. There the Buddha spoke to
the mendicants about Devadatta:

"Mendicants, it's good for a mendicant to check their own failings from
time to time. It's good for a mendicant to check the failings of others
from time to time. It's good for a mendicant to check their own
successes from time to time. It's good for a mendicant to check the
successes of others from time to time. Overcome and overwhelmed by eight
things that oppose the true teaching, Devadatta is going to a place of
loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable.

What eight? Overcome and overwhelmed by gain ... loss ... fame ...
disgrace ... honor ... dishonor ... corrupt wishes ... bad friendship,
Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an
eon, irredeemable. Overcome and overwhelmed by these eight things that
oppose the true teaching, Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to
hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable.

It's good for a mendicant, whenever they encounter it, to overcome gain
... loss ... fame ... disgrace ... honor ... dishonor ... corrupt wishes
... bad friendship.

What advantage does a mendicant gain by overcoming these eight things?

The distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who
lives without overcoming these eight things do not arise when they have
overcome them. This is the advantage that a mendicant gains by
overcoming these eight things.

So, mendicants, you should train like this: 'Whenever we encounter it,
we will overcome gain ... loss ... fame ... disgrace ... honor ...
dishonor ... corrupt wishes ... bad friendship.' That's how you should
train."

</article>
<article id="an8.8">

#### [AN 8.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Uttara on Failure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uttaravipattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Uttara was staying on the Saṅkheyyaka Mountain in
the Mahisa region near Dhavajālikā. There Uttara addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, it's good for a mendicant to check their own
failings from time to time. It's good for a mendicant to check the
failings of others from time to time. It's good for a mendicant to check
their own successes from time to time. It's good for a mendicant to
check the successes of others from time to time."

Now at that time the great king Vessavaṇa was on his way from the north
to the south on some business. He heard Venerable Uttara teaching this
to the mendicants on Saṅkheyyaka Mountain.

Then Vessavaṇa vanished from Saṅkheyyaka Mountain and appeared among the
gods of the thirty-three, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm. Then he went up to Sakka, lord of gods, and said to
him:

"Please sir, you should know this. Venerable Uttara is teaching the
mendicants on Saṅkheyyaka Mountain in this way: 'It's good for a
mendicant from time to time to check their own failings. ... the
failings of others ... their own successes ... the successes of
others.'"

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
Sakka vanished from the gods of the thirty-three and reappeared on
Saṅkheyyaka Mountain in front of Venerable Uttara. Then Sakka went up to
Venerable Uttara, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Is it really true, sir, that you teach the mendicants in this way:
'It's good for a mendicant from time to time to check their own failings
... the failings of others ... their own successes ... the successes of
others'?"

"Indeed, lord of gods."

"Sir, did this teaching come to you from your own inspiration, or was it
spoken by the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha?"

"Well then, lord of gods, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Suppose there was a large heap of grain not far from a town or village.
And a large crowd were to take away grain with carrying poles, baskets,
hip sacks, or their cupped hands. If someone were to go to that crowd
and ask them where they got the grain from, how should that crowd
rightly reply?"

"Sir, they should reply that they took it from the large heap of grain."

"In the same way, lord of gods, whatever is well spoken is spoken by the
Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. Both myself
and others rely completely on that when we speak."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well this was said by Venerable
Uttara! 'Whatever is well spoken is spoken by the Blessed One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. Both myself and others rely
completely on that when we speak.' At one time, Honorable Uttara, the
Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain, not
long after Devadatta had left. There the Buddha spoke to the mendicants
about Devadatta:

'Mendicants, it's good for a mendicant from time to time to check their
own failings ... the failings of others ... their own successes ... the
successes of others. Overcome and overwhelmed by eight things that
oppose the true teaching, Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to
hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable. What eight? Overcome and
overwhelmed by gain ... loss ... fame ... disgrace ... honor ...
dishonor ... corrupt wishes ... bad friendship, Devadatta is going to a
place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable.
Overcome and overwhelmed by these eight things that oppose the true
teaching, Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to hell, there to
remain for an eon, irredeemable.

It's good for a mendicant, whenever they encounter it, to overcome gain
... loss ... fame ... disgrace ... honor ... dishonor ... corrupt wishes
... bad friendship.

What advantage does a mendicant gain by overcoming these eight things?

The distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who
lives without overcoming these eight things do not arise when they have
overcome them. This is the advantage that a mendicant gains by
overcoming these eight things.

So you should train like this:

"Whenever we encounter it, we will overcome gain ... loss ... fame ...
disgrace ... honor ... dishonor ... corrupt wishes ... bad friendship."
That's how you should train.'

Honorable Uttara, this exposition of the teaching is not established
anywhere in the four assemblies---monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.
Sir, learn this exposition of the teaching! Memorize this exposition of
the teaching! Remember this exposition of the teaching! Sir, this
exposition of the teaching is beneficial and relates to the fundamentals
of the spiritual life."

</article>
<article id="an8.9">

#### [AN 8.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Nanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you could rightly call Nanda 'Gentleman', 'strong',
'lovely', and 'lustful'. How could he live the full and pure spiritual
life unless he guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, is dedicated
to wakefulness, and has mindfulness and situational awareness?

This is how Nanda guards the sense doors. If he has to look to the east,
he wholeheartedly concentrates before looking, thinking: 'When I look to
the east, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure will
not overwhelm me.' In this way he's aware of the situation.

If he has to look to the west ... north ... south ... up ... down ... If
he has to survey the intermediate directions, he wholeheartedly
concentrates before looking, thinking: 'When I survey the intermediate
directions, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
will not overwhelm me.' In this way he's aware of the situation. This is
how Nanda guards the sense doors.

This is how Nanda eats in moderation. Nanda reflects rationally on the
food he eats: 'Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but
only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual
practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give
rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going,
blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' This is how Nanda eats in
moderation.

This is how Nanda is committed to wakefulness. Nanda practices walking
and sitting meditation by day, purifying his mind from obstacles. In the
first watch of the night, he continues to practice walking and sitting
meditation. In the middle watch, he lies down in the lion's posture---on
the right side, placing one foot on top of the other---mindful and
aware, and focused on the time of getting up. In the last watch, he gets
up and continues to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying
his mind from obstacles. This is how Nanda is committed to wakefulness.

This is how Nanda has mindfulness and situational awareness. Nanda knows
feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. He knows
perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. He knows
thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. This is how
Nanda has mindfulness and situational awareness.

How could Nanda live the full and pure spiritual life unless he guards
the sense doors, eats in moderation, is dedicated to wakefulness, and
has mindfulness and situational awareness?"

</article>
<article id="an8.10">

#### [AN 8.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Trash ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāraṇḍavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the
Gaggarā Lotus Pond. Now at that time the mendicants accused a mendicant
of an offense. The accused mendicant dodged the issue, distracted the
discussion with irrelevant points, and displayed annoyance, hate, and
bitterness.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, throw this person
out! Throw this person out! This person should be shown the door. Why
should you be vexed by an outsider?

Take a case where a certain person looks just the same as other
good-natured mendicants when going out and coming back, when looking
ahead and aside, when bending and extending the limbs, and when bearing
the outer robe, bowl and robes. That is, so long as the mendicants don't
notice his offense. But when the mendicants notice the offense, they
know that he's a corrupt ascetic, just useless trash. When they realize
this they send him away. Why is that? So that he doesn't corrupt
good-natured mendicants.

Suppose in a growing field of barley some bad barley appeared, just
useless trash. Its roots, stem, and leaves would look just the same as
the healthy barley. That is, so long as the head doesn't appear. But
when the head appears, they know that it's bad barley, just useless
trash. When they realize this they pull it up by the roots and throw it
outside the field. Why is that? So that it doesn't spoil the good
barley.

In the same way, take a case where a certain person looks just the same
as other good-natured mendicants when going out and coming back, when
looking ahead and aside, when bending and extending the limbs, and when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes. That is, so long as the
mendicants don't notice his offense. But when the mendicants notice the
offense, they know that he's a corrupt ascetic, just useless trash. When
they realize this they send him away. Why is that? So that he doesn't
corrupt good-natured mendicants.

Suppose that a large heap of grain is being winnowed. The grains that
are firm and solid form a heap on one side. And the grains that are
flimsy and insubstantial are blown over to the other side. The owners
take a broom and sweep them even further away. Why is that? So that it
doesn't spoil the good grain. In the same way, take a case where a
certain person looks just the same as other good-natured mendicants when
going out and coming back, when looking ahead and aside, when bending
and extending the limbs, and when bearing the outer robe, bowl and
robes. That is, so long as the mendicants don't notice his offense. But
when the mendicants notice the offense, they know that he's a corrupt
ascetic, just useless trash. When they realize this they send him away.
Why is that? So that he doesn't corrupt good-natured mendicants.

Suppose a man needs an irrigation gutter for a well. He'd take a sharp
axe and enter the wood, where he'd knock various trees with the axe. The
trees that were firm and solid made a cracking sound. But the trees that
were rotten inside, decomposing and decayed, made a thud. He'd cut down
such a tree at the root, lop off the crown, and thoroughly clear out the
insides. Then he'd use it as an irrigation gutter for the well. In the
same way, take a case where a certain person looks just the same as
other good-natured mendicants when going out and coming back, when
looking ahead and aside, when bending and extending the limbs, and when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes. That is, so long as the
mendicants don't notice his offense. But when the mendicants notice the
offense, they know that he's a corrupt ascetic, just useless trash. When
they realize this they send him away. Why is that? So that he doesn't
corrupt good-natured mendicants.

> By living together, know that\
> they're irritable, with corrupt wishes,\
> offensive, stubborn, and contemptuous,\
> jealous, stingy, and devious.
>
> They speak to people with a voice\
> so smooth, just like an ascetic.\
> But they act in secret, with their bad views\
> and their lack of regard for others.
>
> You should recognize them for what they are:\
> a creep and liar.\
> Then having gathered in harmony,\
> you should expel them.
>
> Throw out the trash!\
> Get rid of the rubbish!\
> And sweep away the scraps---\
> they're not ascetics, they just think they are.
>
> When you've thrown out those of corrupt wishes,\
> of bad behavior and alms-resort,\
> dwell in communion, ever mindful,\
> the pure with the pure.\
> Then in harmony, alert,\
> make an end of suffering."

</article>

[]{#an8-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an8-mahavagga.xhtml_an8-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.11">

#### [AN 8.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Verañjā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Verañjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañjā
at the root of a neem tree dedicated to Naḷeru. Then the brahmin Verañja
went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that the ascetic Gotama doesn't bow to old
brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. And this is indeed the case, for Mister Gotama does
not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years
and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their
presence or offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister Gotama."

"Brahmin, I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---for whom I should bow down or rise up or offer a seat. If the
Realized One bowed down or rose up or offered a seat to anyone, their
head would explode!"

"Mister Gotama lacks taste."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I lack
taste. For the Realized One has given up taste for sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. It's cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. In this sense you
could rightly say that I lack taste. But that's not what you're talking
about."

"Mister Gotama is indelicate."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm
indelicate. For the Realized One has given up delight in sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. It's cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. In this sense you
could rightly say that I'm indelicate. But that's not what you're
talking about."

"Mister Gotama is a teacher of inaction."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm a
teacher of inaction. For I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal,
and mental conduct, and the many kinds of unskillful things. In this
sense you could rightly say that I'm a teacher of inaction. But that's
not what you're talking about."

"Mister Gotama is a teacher of annihilationism."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm a
teacher of annihilationism. For I teach the annihilation of greed, hate,
and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you
could rightly say that I'm a teacher of annihilationism. But that's not
what you're talking about."

"Mister Gotama is disgusted."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm
disgusted. For I'm disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. In this
sense you could rightly say that I'm disgusted. But that's not what
you're talking about."

"Mister Gotama is an exterminator."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm an
exterminator. For I teach the extermination of greed, hate, and
delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you
could rightly say that I'm an exterminator. But that's not what you're
talking about."

"Mister Gotama is a mortifier."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm a
mortifier. For I say that bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind
should be mortified. I say that a mortifier is someone who has given up
unskillful qualities that should be mortified. They've cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're
unable to arise in the future. The Realized One is someone who has given
up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. He has cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're
unable to arise in the future. In this sense you could rightly say that
I'm a mortifier. But that's not what you're talking about."

"Mister Gotama is immature."

"There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm
immature. I say that an immature person is someone who has given up
future wombs and rebirth into a new state of existence. They've cut them
off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that
they're unable to arise in the future. The Realized One has given up
future wombs and rebirth into a new state of existence. He has cut them
off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that
they're unable to arise in the future. In this sense you could rightly
say that I'm immature. But that's not what you're talking about.

Suppose, brahmin, there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs.
And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Now, the
chick that is first to break out of the eggshell with its claws and beak
and hatch safely: should that be called the eldest or the youngest?"

"Mister Gotama, that should be called the eldest. For it is the eldest
among them."

"In the same way, in this population lost in ignorance, trapped in their
shells, I alone have broken open the egg of ignorance and realized the
supreme perfect awakening. So, brahmin, I am the eldest and the first in
the world.

My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established
and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was
immersed in samādhi. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, I entered and
remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward recollection of past lives. I
recollected many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. I remembered: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so I recollected my many kinds
of past lives, with features and details.

This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. This was my first breaking out, like a chick
breaking out of the eggshell.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth
of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I
saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I
understood how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and
being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good
place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings are reborn
according to their deeds.

This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of
the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. This was my second breaking out, like a chick
breaking out of the eggshell.

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this---purified, bright,
flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and
imperturbable---I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of
defilements. I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. I truly
understood: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is the origin of
defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'. Knowing and seeing
like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire
to be reborn, and ignorance. When it was freed, I knew it was freed.

I understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.'

This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the
night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute. This was my third breaking out, like a chick
breaking out of the eggshell."

When he said this, the brahmin Verañja said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama is the eldest! Mister Gotama is the best! Excellent,
Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge
to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From
this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an8.12">

#### [AN 8.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sīha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time several very prominent
Licchavis were sitting together at the town hall, praising the Buddha,
his teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways.

Now at that time General Sīha, a disciple of the Jains, was sitting in
that assembly. He thought, "That Blessed One must without a doubt be a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. For several very prominent
Licchavis are praising the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha in many
ways. Why don't I go to see that Blessed One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha!"

Then General Sīha went to the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan and said
to him, "Sir, I'd like to go to see the ascetic Gotama."

"But Sīha, you believe in the doctrine of action. Why should you go to
see the ascetic Gotama, who teaches a doctrine of inaction? For the
ascetic Gotama believes in a doctrine of inaction, he teaches inaction,
and he guides his disciples in that way."

Then Sīha's determination to go and see the Buddha died down.

For a second time, several prominent Licchavis were sitting together at
the town hall, praising the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha in many
ways. And for a second time Sīha thought: "Why don't I go to see that
Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!"

Then General Sīha went to the Jain Ñātika ...

Then for a second time Sīha's determination to go and see the Buddha
died down.

For a third time, several prominent Licchavis were sitting together at
the town hall, praising the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha in many
ways. And for a third time Sīha thought, "That Blessed One must without
a doubt be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. For several very
prominent Licchavis are praising the Buddha, his teaching, and the
Saṅgha in many ways. What can these Jains do to me, whether I take leave
of them or not? Why don't I, without taking leave of them, go to see
that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!"

Then Sīha, with around five hundred chariots, set out from Vesālī in the
middle of the day to see the Buddha. He went by carriage as far as the
terrain allowed, then descended and went by foot. Then General Sīha went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'The ascetic Gotama believes in a doctrine of
inaction, he teaches inaction, and he guides his disciples in that way.'
I trust those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do not
misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the
teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?
For we don't want to misrepresent the Blessed One."

"There is, Sīha, a sense in which you could rightly say that I believe
in inaction, I teach inaction, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I believe in
action, I teach action, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I believe in
annihilationism, I teach annihilation, and I guide my disciples in that
way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm disgusted,
I teach disgust, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I\'m an
exterminator, I teach extermination, and I guide my disciples in that
way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm a
mortifier, I teach mortification, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm immature, I
teach immaturity, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And there is a sense in which you could rightly say that I'm ambitious,
I teach ambition, and I guide my disciples in that way.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I believe in
inaction, I teach inaction, and I guide my disciples in that way? I
teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the
many kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you could rightly say
that I teach inaction.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I believe in
action, I teach action, and I guide my disciples in that way? I teach
action regarding good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many
kinds of skillful things. In this sense you could rightly say that I
teach action.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I believe in
annihilationism, I teach annihilation, and I guide my disciples in that
way? I teach the annihilation of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many
kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you could rightly say that I
teach annihilationism.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I'm disgusted,
I teach disgust, and I guide my disciples in that way? I'm disgusted by
bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and by attainment of the
many kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you could rightly say
that I'm disgusted.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I\'m an
exterminator, I teach extermination, and I guide my disciples in that
way? I teach the extermination of greed, hate, and delusion, and the
many kinds of unskillful things. In this sense you could rightly say
that I'm an exterminator.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I'm a
mortifier, I teach mortification, and I guide my disciples in that way?
I say that bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind should be
mortified. I say that a mortifier is someone who has given up unskillful
qualities that should be mortified. They've cut them off at the root,
made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're unable to
arise in the future. The Realized One is someone who has given up
unskillful qualities that should be mortified. He has cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're
unable to arise in the future. In this sense you could rightly say that
I'm a mortifier.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I'm immature, I
teach immaturity, and I guide my disciples in that way? I say that an
immature person is someone who has given up future wombs and rebirth
into a new state of existence. They've cut them off at the root, made
them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're unable to
arise in the future. The Realized One has given up future wombs and
rebirth into a new state of existence. He has cut them off at the root,
made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they're unable to
arise in the future. In this sense you could rightly say that I'm
immature.

And what's the sense in which you could rightly say that I'm ambitious,
I teach ambition, and I guide my disciples in that way? I'm ambitious to
offer solace, the highest solace, I teach solace, and I guide my
disciples in that way. In this sense you could rightly say that I'm
ambitious."

When he said this, General Sīha said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"Sīha, you should act after careful consideration. It's good for
well-known people such as yourself to act after careful consideration."

"Now I'm even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he
tells me to act after careful consideration. For if the followers of
other religions were to gain me as a disciple, they'd carry a banner all
over Vesālī, saying: 'General Sīha has become our disciple!' And yet the
Buddha tells me to act after careful consideration. For a second time, I
go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"For a long time now, Sīha, your family has been a well-spring of
support for the Jain ascetics. You should consider giving to them when
they come."

"Now I'm even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he
tells me to consider giving to the Jain ascetics when they come. Sir, I
have heard that the ascetic Gotama says this: 'Gifts should only be
given to me, and to my disciples. Only what is given to me is very
fruitful, not what is given to others. Only what is given to my
disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of
others.' Yet the Buddha encourages me to give to the Jain ascetics.
Well, sir, we'll know the proper time for that. For a third time, I go
for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.
From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life."

Then the Buddha taught Sīha step by step, with a talk on giving, ethical
conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so
sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. And when the Buddha
knew that Sīha's mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and
confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas: suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean cloth rid of
stains would properly absorb dye, in that very seat the stainless,
immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in General Sīha: "Everything that
has a beginning has an end."

Then Sīha saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. He said to
the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together with the mendicant Saṅgha
please accept tomorrow's meal from me." The Buddha consented with
silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Sīha got up from
his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving.

Then Sīha addressed a certain man, "Mister, please find out if there is
any meat ready for sale." And when the night had passed General Sīha had
delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home. Then he had
the Buddha informed of the time, saying, "Sir, it's time. The meal is
ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to Sīha's home, where he sat on the seat spread out, together with
the Saṅgha of mendicants. Now at that time many Jain ascetics in Vesālī
went from street to street and from square to square, calling out with
raised arms: "Today General Sīha has slaughtered a fat calf for the
ascetic Gotama's meal. The ascetic Gotama knowingly eats meat prepared
specially for him: this is a deed he caused."

Then a certain person went up to Sīha and whispered in his ear, "Please
sir, you should know this. Many Jain ascetics in Vesālī are going from
street to street and square to square, calling out with raised arms:
'Today General Sīha has slaughtered a fat calf for the ascetic Gotama's
meal. The ascetic Gotama knowingly eats meat prepared specially for him:
this is a deed he caused.'"

"Enough, master. For a long time those venerables have wanted to
discredit the Buddha, his teaching, and his Saṅgha. They'll never stop
misrepresenting the Buddha with their incorrect, hollow, false,
untruthful claims. We would never deliberately take the life of a living
creature, not even for life's sake."

Then Sīha served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha
with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. When the
Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Sīha sat down to one
side. Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him
with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and left.

</article>
<article id="an8.13">

#### [AN 8.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Thoroughbred ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assājānīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with eight factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
eight?

It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is well born on both the mother's
and the father's sides.

He's bred in the region fine thoroughbreds come from.

Whatever food he's given, fresh or dry, he eats carefully, without
making a mess.

He's disgusted by sitting or lying down in excrement or urine.

He's sweet-natured and pleasant to live with, and he doesn't upset the
other horses.

He openly shows his tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to his trainer, so
the trainer can try to subdue them.

He carries his load, determining: 'Whether or not the other horses carry
their loads, I'll carry mine.'

He always walks in a straight path. He's strong, and stays strong even
until death.

A fine royal thoroughbred with these eight factors is worthy of a king.
...

In the same way, a mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field
of merit for the world. What eight?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

Whatever food they're given, solid or subtle, they eat carefully,
without bother.

They\'re disgusted with bad conduct by way of body, speech, or mind, and
by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things.

They\'re sweet-natured and pleasant to live with, and they don't upset
the other mendicants.

They openly show their tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to their
sensible spiritual companions, so they can try to subdue them.

They do their training, determining: 'Whether or not the other
mendicants do their training, I'll do mine.'

They always walk in a straight path. And here the straight path is right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

They're energetic: 'Gladly, let my skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let
the blood and flesh waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until
I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.'

A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an8.14">

#### [AN 8.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Wild Colt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assakhaḷuṅkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about eight wild colts and eight defects
in horses, and about eight wild people and eight defects in people.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, are the eight wild colts and eight defects in
horses?

Firstly, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on,
some wild colts back right up and spin the chariot behind them. Some
wild colts are like that. This is the first defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts jump back, wreck the hub, and break the triple rod.
Some wild colts are like that. This is the second defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts shake the cart-pole off their thigh and trample it.
Some wild colts are like that. This is the third defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts take a wrong turn, sending the chariot off track.
Some wild colts are like that. This is the fourth defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts rear up and strike out with their fore-legs. Some
wild colts are like that. This is the fifth defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts ignore the trainer and the goad, spit out the bit,
and go wherever they want. Some wild colts are like that. This is the
sixth defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts don't step forward or turn back but stand right
there still as a post. Some wild colts are like that. This is the
seventh defect of a horse.

Furthermore, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them
on, some wild colts tuck in their fore-legs and hind-legs, and sit right
down on their four legs. Some wild colts are like that. This is the
eighth defect of a horse. These are the eight wild colts and the eight
defects in horses.

And what are the eight wild people and eight defects in people?

Firstly, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant evades it by saying they don't remember. I say that
this person is comparable to the wild colts who, when the trainer says
'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, back right up and spin the
chariot behind them. Some wild people are like that. This is the first
defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant objects to the accuser: 'What has an incompetent fool
like you got to say? How on earth could you imagine you've got something
worth saying!' I say that this person is comparable to the wild colts
who, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, jump
back, wreck the hub, and break the triple rod. Some wild people are like
that. This is the second defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant retorts to the accuser: 'Well, you've fallen into
such-and-such an offense. You should deal with that first.' I say that
this person is comparable to the wild colts who, when the trainer says
'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, shake the cart-pole off their
thigh and trample it. Some wild people are like that. This is the third
defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant dodges the issue, distracts the discussion with
irrelevant points, and displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. I say
that this person is comparable to the wild colts who, when the trainer
says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, take a wrong turn, sending
the chariot off track. Some wild people are like that. This is the
fourth defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant gesticulates while speaking in the middle of the
Saṅgha. I say that this person is comparable to the wild colts who, when
the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, rear up and
strike out with their fore-legs. Some wild people are like that. This is
the fifth defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant ignores the Saṅgha and the accusation and, though
still guilty of the offense, they go wherever they want. I say that this
person is comparable to the wild colts who, when the trainer says
'giddyup!' and spurs and goads them on, ignore the trainer and the goad,
spit out the bit, and go wherever they want. Some wild people are like
that. This is the sixth defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant neither confesses to the offense nor denies it, but
frustrates the Saṅgha by staying silent. I say that this person is
comparable to the wild colts who, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and
spurs and goads them on, don't step forward or turn back but stand right
there still as a post. Some wild people are like that. This is the
seventh defect of a person.

Furthermore, the mendicants accuse a mendicant of an offense. But the
accused mendicant says this: 'Why are you venerables making so much of
an issue over me? Now I'll resign the training and return to a lesser
life.' When they have resigned the training, they say: 'Well,
venerables, are you happy now?' I say that this person is comparable to
the wild colts who, when the trainer says 'giddyup!' and spurs and goads
them on, tuck in their fore-legs and hind-legs, and sit right down on
their four legs. Some wild people are like that. This is the eighth
defect of a person.

These are the eight wild people and eight defects in people."

</article>
<article id="an8.15">

#### [AN 8.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Malasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight stains. What eight? Not reciting is
the stain of hymns. Neglect is the stain of houses. Laziness is the
stain of beauty. Negligence is a guard's stain. Misconduct is a woman's
stain. Stinginess is a giver's stain. Bad, unskillful qualities are a
stain in this world and the next. Worse than any of these is ignorance,
the worst stain of all. These are the eight stains.

> Not reciting is the stain of hymns.\
> The stain of houses is neglect.\
> Laziness is the stain of beauty.\
> A guard's stain is negligence.
>
> Misconduct is a woman's stain.\
> A giver's stain is stinginess.\
> Bad qualities are a stain\
> in this world and the next.\
> But a worse stain than these\
> is ignorance, the worst stain of all."

</article>
<article id="an8.16">

#### [AN 8.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Going on a Mission ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dūteyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of going on a
mission. What eight? It's a mendicant who learns and educates others.
They memorize and remember. They understand and help others understand.
They're skilled at knowing what's on topic and what isn't. And they
don't cause quarrels. A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy
of going on a mission.

Having eight qualities Sāriputta is worthy of going on a mission. What
eight? He learns and educates others. He memorizes and remembers. He
understands and helps others understand. He's skilled at knowing what's
on topic and what isn't. And he doesn't cause quarrels. Having these
eight qualities Sāriputta is worthy of going on a mission.

> They don't tremble when arriving\
> at an assembly of fierce debaters.\
> They don't miss out any words,\
> or conceal the instructions.
>
> Their words aren't poisoned,\
> and they don't tremble when questioned.\
> Such a mendicant\
> is worthy of going on a mission."

</article>
<article id="an8.17">

#### [AN 8.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Catching (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamabandhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a woman catches a man using eight features. What eight?
With weeping, laughing, speaking, appearance, gifts of wildflowers,
scents, tastes, and touches. A woman catches a man using these eight
features. But those beings who are caught by touch are well and truly
caught."

</article>
<article id="an8.18">

#### [AN 8.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Catching (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyabandhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a man catches a woman using eight features. What eight?
With weeping, laughing, speaking, appearance, gifts of wildflowers,
scents, tastes, and touches. A man catches a woman using these eight
features. But those beings who are caught by touch are well and truly
caught."

</article>
<article id="an8.19">

#### [AN 8.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Pahārāda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pahārādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañjā at the root of a neem tree
dedicated to Naḷeru.

Then Pahārāda, lord of titans, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood
to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Well, Pahārāda, do the titans love
the ocean?"

"Sir, they do indeed."

"But seeing what incredible and amazing things do the titans love the
ocean?"

"Sir, seeing eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the
ocean. What eight? The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines,
with no abrupt precipice. This is the first thing the titans love about
the ocean.

Furthermore, the ocean is consistent and doesn't overflow its
boundaries. This is the second thing the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, the ocean doesn't accommodate a carcass, but quickly
carries it to the shore and strands it on the beach. This is the third
thing the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, when they reach the ocean, all the great rivers---that is,
the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī---lose their names and
clans and are simply considered 'the ocean'. This is the fourth thing
the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, for all the world's streams that reach it, and the showers
that fall from the sky, the ocean never empties or fills up. This is the
fifth thing the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, the ocean has just one taste, the taste of salt. This is
the sixth thing the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, the ocean is full of many kinds of treasures, such as
pearls, gems, beryl, conch, quartz, coral, silver, native gold, rubies,
and emeralds. This is the seventh thing the titans love about the ocean.

Furthermore, many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans,
leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or
even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues
long. This is the eighth thing the titans love about the ocean.

Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the
ocean.

Well, sir, do the mendicants love this teaching and training?"

"They do indeed, Pahārāda."

"But seeing how many incredible and amazing things do the mendicants
love this teaching and training?"

"Seeing eight incredible and amazing things, Pahārāda, the mendicants
love this teaching and training. What eight?

The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines, with no abrupt
precipice. In the same way in this teaching and training the penetration
to enlightenment comes from gradual training, progress, and practice,
not abruptly. This is the first thing the mendicants love about this
teaching and training.

The ocean is consistent and doesn't overflow its boundaries. In the same
way, when a training rule is laid down for my disciples they wouldn't
break it even for the sake of their own life. This is the second thing
the mendicants love about this teaching and training.

The ocean doesn't accommodate a carcass, but quickly carries it to the
shore and strands it on the beach. In the same way, the Saṅgha doesn't
accommodate a person who is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with
suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual
practitioner---though claiming to be one---rotten inside, festering, and
depraved. But they quickly gather and expel them. Even if such a person
is sitting in the middle of the Saṅgha, they're far from the Saṅgha, and
the Saṅgha is far from them. This is the third thing the mendicants love
about this teaching and training.

When they reach the ocean, all the great rivers---that is, the Ganges,
Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī---lose their names and clans and
are simply considered 'the ocean'. In the same way, when they go forth
from the lay life to homelessness, all four classes---aristocrats,
brahmins, peasants, and menials---lose their former names and clans and
are simply considered 'Sakyan ascetics'. This is the fourth thing the
mendicants love about this teaching and training.

For all the world's streams that reach it, and the showers that fall
from the sky, the ocean never empties or fills up. In the same way,
though several mendicants become fully extinguished in the element of
extinguishment with no residue, the element of extinguishment never
empties or fills up. This is the fifth thing the mendicants love about
this teaching and training.

The ocean has just one taste, the taste of salt. In the same way, this
teaching and training has one taste, the taste of freedom. This is the
sixth thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training.

The ocean is full of many kinds of treasures, such as pearls, gems,
beryl, conch, quartz, coral, silver, native gold, rubies, and emeralds.
In the same way, this teaching and training is full of many kinds of
treasures, such as the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four
right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the
five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.
This is the seventh thing the mendicants love about this teaching and
training.

Many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans,
leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or
even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues
long. In the same way, great beings live in this teaching and training,
and these are those beings. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one
practicing to realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the
one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one,
and the one practicing for perfection. This is the eighth thing the
mendicants love about this teaching and training.

Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things, Pahārāda, the
mendicants love this teaching and training."

</article>
<article id="an8.20">

#### [AN 8.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse
of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting
surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. And then, as the night was getting
late, in the first watch of the night, Venerable Ānanda got up from his
seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms
toward the Buddha and said, "Sir, the night is getting late. It is the
first watch of the night, and the Saṅgha of monks has been sitting long.
Please, sir, may the Buddha recite the monastic code to the monks."

But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent.

For a second time, as the night was getting late, in the middle watch of
the night, Ānanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one
shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha and said, "Sir, the
night is getting late. It is the middle watch of the night, and the
Saṅgha of monks has been sitting long. Please, sir, may the Buddha
recite the monastic code to the monks."

But for a second time the Buddha kept silent.

For a third time, as the night was getting late, in the last watch of
the night, as dawn stirred, bringing joy to the night, Ānanda got up
from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined
palms toward the Buddha and said, "Sir, the night is getting late. It is
the last watch of the night and dawn stirs, bringing joy to the night.
And the Saṅgha has been sitting long. Please, sir, may the Buddha recite
the monastic code to the monks."

"Ānanda, the assembly is not pure."

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna thought, "Who is the Buddha talking
about?"

Then he focused on comprehending the minds of everyone in the Saṅgha. He
saw that unethical person, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious
behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner---though
claiming to be one---rotten inside, festering, and depraved, sitting in
the middle of the Saṅgha.

When he saw him he got up from his seat, went up to him and said, "Get
up, reverend. The Buddha has seen you. You can't live in communion with
the monks."

But when he said this, that person kept silent.

For a second time

and a third time, he asked that monk to leave.

But for a third time that person kept silent.

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna took that person by the arm, ejected him
out the gate, and bolted the door. Then he went up to the Buddha, and
said to him, "I have ejected that person. The assembly is pure. Please,
sir, may the Buddha recite the monastic code to the monks."

"It's incredible, Moggallāna, it's amazing, how that futile man waited
to be taken by the arm!"

Then the Buddha said to the monks:

"Now, monks, you should perform the sabbath and recite the monastic
code. From this day forth, I will not perform the sabbath or recite the
monastic code. It's impossible, monks, it can't happen that a Realized
One could recite the monastic code in an impure assembly.

Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the
ocean. What eight? The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines,
with no abrupt precipice. This is the first thing the titans love about
the ocean.

(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)

Furthermore, many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans,
leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or
even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues
long. This is the eighth thing the titans love about the ocean. Seeing
these eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the ocean.

In the same way, seeing eight incredible and amazing things, mendicants,
the mendicants love this teaching and training. What eight?

The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines, with no abrupt
precipice. In the same way in this teaching and training the penetration
to enlightenment comes from gradual training, progress, and practice,
not abruptly. This is the first thing the mendicants love about this
teaching and training. ...

Many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans,
leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or
even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues
long. In the same way, great beings live in this teaching and training,
and these are those beings. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one
practicing to realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the
one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one,
and the one practicing for perfection. This is the eighth thing the
mendicants love about this teaching and training.

Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things, the mendicants love
this teaching and training."

</article>

[]{#an8-gahapativagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Householders {#an8-gahapativagga.xhtml_an8-gahapativagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.21">

#### [AN 8.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ugga of Vesālī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamauggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, you should remember the householder Ugga of
Vesālī as someone who has eight amazing and incredible qualities."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then a certain mendicant robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, went to the home of the householder Ugga of Vesālī, where he
sat on the seat spread out. Then Ugga of Vesālī went up to that
mendicant, bowed, and sat down to one side. The mendicant said to him:

"Householder, the Buddha declared that you have eight amazing and
incredible qualities. What are the eight qualities that he spoke of?"

"Sir, I don't know what eight amazing and incredible qualities the
Buddha was referring to. But these eight amazing and incredible
qualities are found in me. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, householder," replied the mendicant. Ugga of Vesālī said this:

"Sir, when I first saw the Buddha off in the distance, my heart was
inspired as soon as I saw him. This is the first incredible and amazing
quality found in me.

With confident heart I paid homage to the Buddha. The Buddha taught me
step by step, with a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He
explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and
the benefit of renunciation. And when he knew that my mind was ready,
pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the
special teaching of the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation,
and the path. Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb
dye, in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma
arose in me: 'Everything that has a beginning has an end.' I saw,
attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. I went beyond doubt, got
rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others
regarding the Teacher's instructions. Right there I went for refuge to
the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha. And I undertook the five
training rules with celibacy as the fifth. This is the second incredible
and amazing quality found in me.

I had four teenage wives. And I went to them and said: 'Sisters, I've
undertaken the five training rules with celibacy as fifth. If you wish,
you may stay here, enjoy my wealth, and do good deeds. Or you can return
to your own families. Or would you prefer if I gave you to another man?'
When I said this, my eldest wife said to me: 'Master, please give me to
such-and-such a man.' Then I summoned that man. Taking my wife with my
left hand and a ceremonial vase with my right, I presented her to that
man with the pouring of water. But I can't recall getting upset while
giving away my teenage wife. This is the third incredible and amazing
quality found in me.

And though my family has wealth, it's shared without reserve with
ethical people of good character. This is the fourth incredible and
amazing quality found in me.

When I pay homage to a mendicant, I do so carefully, not carelessly.
This is the fifth incredible and amazing quality found in me.

If that venerable teaches me the Dhamma, I listen carefully, not
carelessly. But if they don't teach me the Dhamma, I teach them. This is
the sixth incredible and amazing quality found in me.

It's not unusual for deities to come to me and announce: 'Householder,
the Buddha's teaching is well explained!' When they say this I say to
them: 'The Buddha's teaching is well explained, regardless of whether or
not you deities say so!' But I don't recall getting too excited by the
fact that the deities come to me, and I have a conversation with them.
This is the seventh incredible and amazing quality found in me.

Of the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha, I don't see any that I
haven't given up. This is the eighth incredible and amazing quality
found in me.

These eight amazing and incredible qualities are found in me. But I
don't know what eight amazing and incredible qualities the Buddha was
referring to."

Then that mendicant, after taking almsfood in Ugga of Vesālī's home, got
up from his seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. He
informed the Buddha of all he had discussed with the householder Ugga of
Vesālī. The Buddha said:

"Good, good, mendicant! When I declared that the householder Ugga of
Vesālī was someone who has eight amazing and incredible qualities, I was
referring to the same eight qualities that he rightly explained to you.
You should remember the householder Ugga of Vesālī as someone who has
these eight amazing and incredible qualities."

</article>
<article id="an8.22">

#### [AN 8.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ugga of Elephant Village ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyauggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at Elephant
Village. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, you
should remember the householder Ugga of Elephant Village as someone who
has eight amazing and incredible qualities."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then a certain mendicant robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, went to the home of the householder Ugga of Elephant Village,
where he sat on the seat spread out. Then Ugga of Elephant Village went
up to that mendicant, bowed, and sat down to one side. The mendicant
said to him:

"Householder, the Buddha declared that you have eight amazing and
incredible qualities. What are the eight qualities that he spoke of?"

"Sir, I don't know what eight amazing and incredible qualities the
Buddha was referring to. But these eight amazing and incredible
qualities are found in me. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, householder," replied the mendicant. Ugga of Elephant Village said
this:

"Sir, when I first saw the Buddha off in the distance I was partying in
the Dragon's Park. My heart was inspired as soon as I saw him, and I
sobered up. This is the first incredible and amazing quality found in
me.

With confident heart I paid homage to the Buddha. The Buddha taught me
step by step, with a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He
explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and
the benefit of renunciation. And when he knew that my mind was ready,
pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the
special teaching of the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation,
and the path. Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb
dye, in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma
arose in me: 'Everything that has a beginning has an end.' I saw,
attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. I went beyond doubt, got
rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others
regarding the Teacher's instructions. Right there I went for refuge to
the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha. And I undertook the five
training rules with celibacy as the fifth. This is the second incredible
and amazing quality found in me.

I had four teenage wives. And I went to them and said: 'Sisters, I've
undertaken the five training rules with celibacy as fifth. If you wish,
you may stay here, enjoy my wealth, and do good deeds. Or you can return
to your own families. Or would you prefer if I gave you to another man?'
When I said this, my eldest wife said to me: 'Master, please give me to
such-and-such a man.' Then I summoned that man. Taking my wife with my
left hand and a ceremonial vase with my right, I presented her to that
man with the pouring of water. But I can't recall getting upset while
giving away my teenage wife. This is the third incredible and amazing
quality found in me.

And though my family has wealth, it's shared without reserve with
ethical people of good character. This is the fourth incredible and
amazing quality found in me.

When I pay homage to a mendicant, I do so carefully, not carelessly. If
that venerable teaches me the Dhamma, I listen carefully, not
carelessly. But if they don't teach me the Dhamma, I teach them. This is
the fifth incredible and amazing quality found in me.

It's not unusual for deities to come to me when the Saṅgha has been
invited and announce: 'Householder, that mendicant is freed both ways.
That one is freed by wisdom. That one is a direct witness. That one is
attained to view. That one is freed by faith. That one is a follower of
teachings. That one is a follower by faith. That one is ethical, of good
character. That one is unethical, of bad character.' But while I'm
serving the Saṅgha I don't recall thinking: 'Let me give this one just a
little, and that one a lot.' Rather, I give impartially. This is the
sixth incredible and amazing quality found in me.

It's not unusual for deities to come to me and announce: 'Householder,
the Buddha's teaching is well explained!' When they say this I say to
them: 'The Buddha's teaching is well explained, regardless of whether or
not you deities say so!' But I don't recall getting too excited by the
fact that the deities come to me, and I have a conversation with them.
This is the seventh incredible and amazing quality found in me.

If I pass away before the Buddha, it would be no wonder if the Buddha
declares of me: 'The householder Ugga of Elephant Village is bound by no
fetter that might return him to this world.' This is the eighth
incredible and amazing quality found in me.

These eight amazing and incredible qualities are found in me. But I
don't know what eight amazing and incredible qualities the Buddha was
referring to."

Then that mendicant, after taking almsfood in Ugga of Elephant Village's
home, got up from his seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return
from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.
He informed the Buddha of all he had discussed with the householder Ugga
of Elephant Village. The Buddha said:

"Good, good, mendicant! When I declared that the householder Ugga of
Elephant Village was someone who has eight amazing and incredible
qualities, I was referring to the same eight qualities that he rightly
explained to you. You should remember the householder Ugga of Elephant
Village as someone who has these eight amazing and incredible
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an8.23">

#### [AN 8.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Hatthaka (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamahatthakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava
Tree-shrine. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, you should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as
someone who has seven amazing and incredible qualities. What seven? He's
faithful, ethical, conscientious, prudent, learned, generous, and wise.
You should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone who has
these seven amazing and incredible qualities."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then a certain mendicant robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, went to the home of the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī, where
he sat on the seat spread out. Then Hatthaka went up to that mendicant,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The mendicant said to Hatthaka:

"Householder, the Buddha declared that you have seven amazing and
incredible qualities. What seven? He said that you're faithful, ethical,
conscientious, prudent, learned, generous, and wise. The Buddha declared
that you have these seven amazing and incredible qualities."

"But sir, I trust that no white-clothed lay people were present?"

"No, there weren't any white-clothed lay people present."

"That's good, sir."

Then that mendicant, after taking almsfood in Hatthaka of Āḷavī's home,
got up from his seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told
him of what he had discussed with the householder Hatthaka. The Buddha
said:

"Good, good, mendicant! That gentleman has few wishes. He doesn't want
his own good qualities to be made known to others. Well then, mendicant,
you should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone who has
this eighth amazing and incredible quality, that is, fewness of wishes."

</article>
<article id="an8.24">

#### [AN 8.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Hatthaka (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyahatthakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, at the Aggāḷava
Tree-shrine. Then the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī, escorted by around
five hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down
to one side. The Buddha said to Hatthaka:

"Hatthaka, you have a large congregation. How do you bring together such
a large congregation?"

"Sir, I bring together such a large congregation by using the four ways
of being inclusive as taught by the Buddha. When I know that a person
can be included by a gift, I include them by giving a gift. When I know
that a person can be included by kindly words, I include them by kindly
words. When I know that a person can be included by taking care of them,
I include them by caring for them. When I know that a person can be
included by equality, I include them by treating them equally. But also,
sir, my family is wealthy. They wouldn't think that a poor person was
worth listening to in the same way."

"Good, good, Hatthaka! This is the right way to bring together a large
congregation. Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who
have brought together a large congregation have done so by using these
four ways of being inclusive."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Hatthaka of
Āḷavī with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat, bowed,
and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving. Then, not long after
Hatthaka had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, you
should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone who has
eight amazing and incredible qualities. What eight? He's faithful,
ethical, conscientious, prudent, learned, generous, wise, and has few
wishes. You should remember the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī as someone
who has these eight amazing and incredible qualities."

</article>
<article id="an8.25">

#### [AN 8.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahānāma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahānāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, how is a lay follower defined?"

"Mahānāma, when you've gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, you're considered to be a lay follower."

"But how is an ethical lay follower defined?"

"When a lay follower doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, they're
considered to be an ethical lay follower."

"But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit
themselves, not others?"

"A lay follower is accomplished in faith, but doesn't encourage others
to do the same. They're accomplished in ethical conduct, but don't
encourage others to do the same. They're accomplished in generosity, but
don't encourage others to do the same. They like to see the mendicants,
but don't encourage others to do the same. They like to hear the true
teaching, but don't encourage others to do the same. They readily
memorize the teachings they've heard, but don't encourage others to do
the same. They examine the meaning of the teachings they've memorized,
but don't encourage others to do the same. Understanding the meaning and
the teaching, they practice accordingly, but they don't encourage others
to do the same. That's how we define a lay follower who is practicing to
benefit themselves, not others."

"But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit both
themselves and others?"

"A lay follower is accomplished in faith and encourages others to do the
same. They're accomplished in ethical conduct and encourage others to do
the same. They're accomplished in generosity and encourage others to do
the same. They like to see the mendicants and encourage others to do the
same. They like to hear the true teaching and encourage others to do the
same. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard and encourage
others to do the same. They examine the meaning of the teachings they've
memorized and encourage others to do the same. Understanding the meaning
and the teaching, they practice accordingly and they encourage others to
do the same. That's how we define a lay follower who is practicing to
benefit both themselves and others."

</article>
<article id="an8.26">

#### [AN 8.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Jīvaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jīvakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in Jīvaka's Mango
Grove. Then Jīvaka Komārabhacca went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, how is a lay follower defined?"

"Jīvaka, when you've gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, you're considered to be a lay follower."

"But how is an ethical lay follower defined?"

"When a lay follower doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, they're
considered to be an ethical lay follower."

"But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit
themselves, not others?"

"A lay follower is accomplished in faith, but doesn't encourage others
to do the same. They're accomplished in ethical conduct ... they're
accomplished in generosity ... they like to see the mendicants ... they
like to hear the true teaching ... they memorize the teachings ... they
examine the meaning ... Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they
practice accordingly, but they don't encourage others to do the same.
That's how we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit
themselves, not others."

"But how do we define a lay follower who is practicing to benefit both
themselves and others?"

"A lay follower is accomplished in faith and encourages others to do the
same. They're accomplished in ethical conduct and encourage others to do
the same. They're accomplished in generosity and encourage others to do
the same. They like to see the mendicants and encourage others to do the
same. They like to hear the true teaching and encourage others to do the
same. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard and encourage
others to do the same. They examine the meaning of the teachings they've
memorized and encourage others to do the same. Understanding the meaning
and the teaching, they practice accordingly and they encourage others to
do the same. That's how we define a lay follower who is practicing to
benefit both themselves and others."

</article>
<article id="an8.27">

#### [AN 8.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight powers. What eight? Crying is the
power of babies. Anger is the power of females. Weapons are the power of
bandits. Authority is the power of rulers. Complaining is the power of
fools. Reason is the power of the astute. Reflection is the power of the
learned. Patience is the power of ascetics and brahmins. These are the
eight powers."

</article>
<article id="an8.28">

#### [AN 8.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Sāriputta, how many powers does a mendicant who has ended the
defilements have that qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have
ended'?"

"Sir, a mendicant who has ended the defilements has eight powers that
qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

What eight? Firstly, a mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen
with right wisdom all conditions as truly impermanent. This is a power
that a mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to claim: 'My
defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen with
right wisdom that sensual pleasures are truly like a pit of glowing
coals. This is a power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements
relies on to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, the mind of a mendicant with defilements ended slants,
slopes, and inclines to seclusion. They're withdrawn, loving
renunciation, and have totally eliminated defiling influences. This is a
power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to claim:
'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. This is a power that a mendicant
who has ended the defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have
ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four bases of psychic power ... the five faculties ... the seven
awakening factors ... the noble eightfold path. This is a power that a
mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to claim: 'My
defilements have ended.'

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has these eight powers that
qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'"

</article>
<article id="an8.29">

#### [AN 8.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lost Opportunities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akkhaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"'Now is the time! Now is the time!' So says an unlearned ordinary
person. But they don't know whether it's time or not. Mendicants, there
are eight lost opportunities for spiritual practice. What eight?

Firstly, a Realized One has arisen in the world---perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace,
extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person
has been reborn in hell. This is the first lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the fourth
lost opportunity.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go. This is the fifth lost
opportunity ...

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the sixth lost opportunity
...

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, stupid, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the seventh lost opportunity ...

Furthermore, a Realized One has not arisen in the world ... So he
doesn't teach the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. And a person is reborn in a central country.
And they're wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well
said from what is poorly said. This is the eighth lost opportunity ...

There are these eight lost opportunities for spiritual practice.

Mendicants, there is just one opportunity for spiritual practice. What
is that one? It's when a Realized One has arisen in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He teaches the
Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the
Holy One. And a person is reborn in a central country. And they're wise,
bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well said from what is
poorly said. This is the one opportunity for spiritual practice.

> When you've gained the human state,\
> and the true teaching has been so well proclaimed,\
> those who don't seize the moment\
> are wasting their time.
>
> For many wrong times are spoken of,\
> which obstruct the path.\
> Only on rare occasions\
> do Realized Ones arise.
>
> If you find yourself in their presence,\
> so hard to find in the world,\
> and if you've gained a human birth,\
> and the teaching of the Dhamma;\
> that's enough to make an effort,\
> for a person who cares for their own welfare.
>
> How is the true teaching to be understood\
> so that the moment doesn't pass you by?\
> For if you miss your moment\
> you'll grieve when sent to hell.
>
> If you fail to achieve\
> certainty regarding the true teaching\
> you'll regret it for a long time,\
> like a trader who loses a profit.
>
> A man shrouded by ignorance,\
> a failure in the true teaching,\
> will long undergo\
> transmigration through birth and death.
>
> Those who've gained the human state\
> when the true teaching has been so well proclaimed,\
> and have completed what the Teacher taught---\
> or will do so, or are doing so now---
>
> have realized the right time in the world\
> for the supreme spiritual life.\
> You should live guarded, ever mindful,\
> not festering with defilements,
>
> among those restrained ones\
> who have practiced the path\
> proclaimed by the Realized One, the Clear-eyed One,\
> and taught by the kinsman of the Sun.
>
> Having cut off all underlying tendencies\
> that follow those drifting in Māra's dominion,\
> they're the ones in this world `<j>`{=html}who've truly crossed over,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> having reached the ending of defilements."

</article>
<article id="an8.30">

#### [AN 8.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Anuruddha and the Great Thoughts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuruddhamahāvitakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. And at that time
Venerable Anuruddha was staying in the land of the Cetīs in the Eastern
Bamboo Park. Then as Anuruddha was in private retreat this thought came
to his mind:

"This teaching is for those of few wishes, not those of many wishes.
It's for the contented, not those who lack contentment. It's for the
secluded, not those who enjoy company. It's for the energetic, not the
lazy. It's for the mindful, not the unmindful. It's for those with
immersion, not those without immersion. It's for the wise, not the
witless."

Then the Buddha knew what Anuruddha was thinking. As easily as a strong
person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the deer
park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood in the land of the Bhaggas and reappeared in
front of Anuruddha in the Eastern Bamboo Park in the land of the Cetīs,
and sat on the seat spread out. Anuruddha bowed to the Buddha and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Good, good, Anuruddha! It's good that you reflect on these thoughts of
a great man: 'This teaching is for those of few wishes, not those of
many wishes. It's for the contented, not those who lack contentment.
It's for the secluded, not those who enjoy company. It's for the
energetic, not the lazy. It's for the mindful, not the unmindful. It's
for those with immersion, not those without immersion. It's for the
wise, not the witless.' Well then, Anuruddha, you should also reflect on
the following eighth thought of a great man: 'This teaching is for those
who don't enjoy proliferating and don't like to proliferate, not for
those who enjoy proliferating and like to proliferate.'

First you'll reflect on these eight thoughts of a great man. Then
whenever you want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, you'll enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.

You'll enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture
and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one,
without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

You'll enter and remain in the third absorption, where you'll meditate
with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.'

Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness,
you'll enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or
pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

First you'll reflect on these eight thoughts of a great man, and you'll
get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that
belong to the higher mind---when you want, without trouble or
difficulty. Then as you live contented your rag robe will seem to you
like a chest full of garments of different colors seems to a householder
or householder's child. It will be for your enjoyment, relief, and
comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment.

As you live contented your scraps of almsfood will seem to you like
boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups
and sauces seems to a householder or householder's child. It will be for
your enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon
extinguishment.

As you live contented your lodging at the root of a tree will seem to
you like a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door
fastened and window shuttered seems to a householder or householder's
child. It will be for your enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for
alighting upon extinguishment.

As you live contented your lodging at the root of a tree will seem to
you like a couch spread with woolen covers---shag-piled, pure white, or
embroidered with flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a
canopy above and red pillows at both ends seems to a householder or
householder's child. It will be for your enjoyment, relief, and comfort,
and for alighting upon extinguishment.

As you live contented your rancid urine as medicine will seem to you
like various medicines---ghee, butter, oil, honey, and molasses---seem
to a householder or householder's child. It will be for your enjoyment,
relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment. Well then,
Anuruddha, for the next rainy season residence you should stay right
here in the land of the Cetīs in the Eastern Bamboo Park."

"Yes, sir," Anuruddha replied.

After advising Anuruddha like this, the Buddha---as easily as a strong
person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Eastern
Bamboo Park in the land of the Cetīs and reappeared in the deer park at
Bhesakaḷā's Wood in the land of the Bhaggas. He sat on the seat spread
out and addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, I will teach you the
eight thoughts of a great man. Listen ...

And what are the eight thoughts of a great man? This teaching is for
those of few wishes, not those of many wishes. It's for the contented,
not those who lack contentment. It's for the secluded, not those who
enjoy company. It's for the energetic, not the lazy. It's for the
mindful, not the unmindful. It's for those with immersion, not those
without immersion. It's for the wise, not the witless. It's for those
who don't enjoy proliferating and don't like to proliferate, not for
those who enjoy proliferating and like to proliferate.

'This teaching is for those of few wishes, not those of many wishes.'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? A mendicant with few wishes
doesn't wish: 'May they know me as having few wishes!' When contented,
they don't wish: 'May they know me as contented!' When secluded, they
don't wish: 'May they know me as secluded!' When energetic, they don't
wish: 'May they know me as energetic!' When mindful, they don't wish:
'May they know me as mindful!' When immersed, they don't wish: 'May they
know me as immersed!' When wise, they don't wish: 'May they know me as
wise!' When not enjoying proliferation, they don't wish: 'May they know
me as one who doesn't enjoy proliferating!' 'This teaching is for those
of few wishes, not those of many wishes.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

'This teaching is for the contented, not those who lack contentment.'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? It's for a mendicant who's
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. 'This teaching is for the contented, not those
who lack contentment.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'This teaching is for the secluded, not those who enjoy company.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? It's for a mendicant who lives
secluded. But monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, rulers and their ministers,
monastics of other religions and their disciples go to visit them. With
a mind slanting, sloping, and inclining to seclusion, withdrawn, and
loving renunciation, that mendicant invariably gives each of them a talk
emphasizing the topic of dismissal. 'This teaching is for the secluded,
not those who enjoy company.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it.

'This teaching is for the energetic, not the lazy.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? It's for a mendicant who lives with energy roused
up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities.
They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to
developing skillful qualities. 'This teaching is for the energetic, not
the lazy.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'This teaching is for the mindful, not the unmindful.' That's what I
said, but why did I say it? It's for a mendicant who's mindful. They
have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what
was said and done long ago. 'This teaching is for the mindful, not the
unmindful.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'This teaching is for those with immersion, not those without
immersion.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? It's for a
mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ...
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. 'This
teaching is for those with immersion, not those without immersion.'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'This teaching is for the wise, not the witless.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? It's for a mendicant who's wise. They have the
wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and
leads to the complete ending of suffering. 'This teaching is for the
wise, not the witless.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'This teaching is for those who don't enjoy proliferating and don't like
to proliferate, not for those who enjoy proliferating and like to
proliferate.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? It's for a
mendicant whose mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and
becomes decided regarding the cessation of proliferation. 'This teaching
is for those who don't enjoy proliferating and don't like to
proliferate, not for those who enjoy proliferating and like to
proliferate.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

Then Anuruddha stayed the next rainy season residence right there in the
land of the Cetīs in the Eastern Bamboo Park. And Anuruddha, living
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the
supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived
having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Anuruddha became one of the perfected.
And on the occasion of attaining perfection he recited these verses:

> "Knowing my thoughts,\
> the supreme Teacher in the world\
> came to me in a mind-made body,\
> using his psychic power.
>
> He taught me more\
> than I had thought of.\
> The Buddha who loves non-proliferation\
> taught me non-proliferation.
>
> Understanding that teaching,\
> I happily did his bidding.\
> I've attained the three knowledges,\
> and have fulfilled the Buddha's instructions."

</article>

[]{#an8-danavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Giving {#an8-danavagga.xhtml_an8-danavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.31">

#### [AN 8.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight gifts. What eight? A person might
give a gift after insulting the recipient. Or they give out of fear. Or
they give thinking, 'They gave to me.' Or they give thinking, 'They'll
give to me.' Or they give thinking, 'It's good to give.' Or they give
thinking, 'I cook, they don't. It wouldn't be right for me to not give
to them.' Or they give thinking, 'By giving this gift I'll get a good
reputation.' Or they give thinking, 'This is an adornment and requisite
for the mind.' These are the eight gifts."

</article>
<article id="an8.32">

#### [AN 8.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

> "Faith, conscience, and skillful giving\
> are qualities true persons follow.\
> For this, they say, is the path of the gods,\
> which leads to the heavenly realm."

</article>
<article id="an8.33">

#### [AN 8.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reasons to Give ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight grounds for giving. What eight? A
person might give a gift out of favoritism or hostility or stupidity or
cowardice. Or they give thinking, 'Giving was practiced by my father and
my father's father. It would not be right for me to abandon this family
tradition.' Or they give thinking, 'After I've given this gift, when my
body breaks up, after death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' Or they give thinking, 'When giving this gift my mind becomes
clear, and I become happy and joyful.' Or they give a gift thinking,
'This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.' These are the eight
grounds for giving."

</article>
<article id="an8.34">

#### [AN 8.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Field ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khettasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a field has eight factors a seed sown in it is not
very fruitful or rewarding or productive. What eight factors does it
have? It's when a field has mounds and ditches. It has stones and
gravel. It's salty. It doesn't have deep furrows. And it's not equipped
with water inlets, water outlets, irrigation channels, and boundaries.
When a field has these eight factors a seed sown in it is not fruitful
or rewarding or productive.

In the same way, when an ascetic or brahmin has eight factors a gift
given to them is not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful. What eight factors do they have? It's when an ascetic or
brahmin has wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. When
an ascetic or brahmin has these eight factors a gift given to them is
not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or bountiful.

When a field has eight factors a seed sown in it is very fruitful and
rewarding and productive. What eight factors does it have? It's when a
field doesn't have mounds and ditches. It doesn't have stones and
gravel. It's not salty. It has deep furrows. And it's equipped with
water inlets, water outlets, irrigation channels, and boundaries. When a
field has these eight factors a seed sown in it is very fruitful and
rewarding and productive.

In the same way, when an ascetic or brahmin has eight factors a gift
given to them is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful. What eight factors do they have? It's when an ascetic or
brahmin has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. When
an ascetic or brahmin has these eight factors a gift given to them is
very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.

> When the field is excellent,\
> and the seed sown in it is excellent,\
> and the rainfall is excellent,\
> the crop of grain will be excellent.
>
> Its health is excellent,\
> its growth is excellent,\
> its maturation is excellent,\
> and its fruit is excellent.
>
> So too, when you give excellent food\
> to those of excellent ethics,\
> it leads to many excellences,\
> for what you did was excellent.
>
> So if a person wants excellence,\
> let them excel in this.\
> You should frequent those with excellent wisdom,\
> so that your own excellence will flourish.
>
> Excelling in knowledge and conduct,\
> and having excellence of mind,\
> you perform excellent deeds,\
> and gain excellent benefits.
>
> Truly knowing the world,\
> and having attained excellence of view,\
> one who excels in mind proceeds,\
> relying on excellence in the path.
>
> Shaking off all stains,\
> and attaining the excellence of extinguishment,\
> you're freed from all sufferings:\
> this is complete excellence."

</article>
<article id="an8.35">

#### [AN 8.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rebirth by Giving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānūpapattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight rebirths by giving. What eight?

First, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. Whatever they give they expect back. They see a well-to-do
aristocrat or brahmin or householder amusing themselves, supplied and
provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. It occurs to them:
'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the
company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders!' They
settle on that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled
for less and not developed further, their thought leads to rebirth
there. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the
company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. But I say
that this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical.
The heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins ... Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard: 'The gods of the four great kings are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' It occurs to them: 'If only,
when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of
the gods of the four great kings!' ... When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of the four great
kings. But I say that this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for
the unethical. The heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of
their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins ... Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard: 'The gods of the thirty-three ...'

'The gods of Yama ...'

'The joyful gods ...'

'The gods who love to imagine ...'

'The gods who control what is imagined by others are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' It occurs to them: 'If only, when my body
breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not
developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others. But I say that this is only for
those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's wish of an
ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. Whatever they give they expect back. And they've heard: 'The
gods of Brahmā's host are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' It
occurs to them: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would
be reborn in the company of the gods of Brahmā's host!' They settle on
that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for less
and not developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the
gods of Brahmā's host. But I say that this is only for those of ethical
conduct, not for the unethical. And for those free of desire, not those
with desire. The heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of
their freedom from desire.

These are the eight rebirths by giving."

</article>
<article id="an8.36">

#### [AN 8.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grounds for Making Merit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puññakiriyavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these three grounds for making merit. What three?
Giving, ethical conduct, and meditation are all grounds for making
merit.

First, someone has practiced a little giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn among disadvantaged humans.

Next, someone has practiced a moderate amount of giving and ethical
conduct as grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as
meditation as a ground for making merit. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn among well-off humans.

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the four great kings. There, the
four great kings themselves have practiced giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit to a greater degree than the other gods. So
they surpass them in ten respects: heavenly life span, beauty,
happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches.

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the thirty-three. There, Sakka,
lord of gods, has practiced giving and ethical conduct as grounds for
making merit to a greater degree than the other gods. So he surpasses
them in ten respects ...

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. There, the god Suyāma has
practiced giving and ethical conduct as grounds for making merit to a
greater degree than the other gods. So he surpasses them in ten respects
...

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the joyful gods. There, the god Santusita has
practiced giving and ethical conduct as grounds for making merit to a
greater degree than the other gods. So he surpasses them in ten respects
...

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods who love to imagine. There, the god
Sunimmita has practiced giving and ethical conduct as grounds for making
merit to a greater degree than the other gods. So he surpasses them in
ten respects ...

Next, someone has practiced a lot of giving and ethical conduct as
grounds for making merit, but they haven't got as far as meditation as a
ground for making merit. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods who control what is imagined by
others. There, the god Vasavattī has practiced giving and ethical
conduct as grounds for making merit to a greater degree than the other
gods. So he surpasses them in ten respects: heavenly life span, beauty,
happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches.

These are the three grounds for making merit."

</article>
<article id="an8.37">

#### [AN 8.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Gifts of a True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisadānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight gifts of a true person. What eight?
Their gift is pure, good quality, timely, appropriate, intelligent, and
regular. While giving their heart is confident, and afterwards they're
uplifted. These are the eight gifts of a true person.

> He gives pure, good quality, and timely gifts\
> of appropriate food and drinks\
> regularly to spiritual practitioners\
> who are fertile fields of merit.
>
> They never regret\
> giving away many things of the flesh.\
> Discerning people praise\
> giving such gifts.
>
> An intelligent person sacrifices like this,\
> faithful, with a mind of letting go.\
> Such an astute person is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

</article>
<article id="an8.38">

#### [AN 8.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A True Person ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a true person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of the people. For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
mother and father; children and partners; bondservants, workers, and
staff; friends and colleagues; departed ancestors; the king; the
deities; and ascetics and brahmins.

It's like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. In the same way, a true
person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
the people. ...

> A wise person living at home\
> benefits many people.\
> Neither by day or at night do they neglect\
> their mother, father, and ancestors.\
> They venerate them in accord with the teaching,\
> remembering what they have done.
>
> One of settled faith and good nature\
> venerates the homeless renunciates,\
> the mendicant spiritual practitioners,\
> knowing their good-hearted qualities.
>
> Good for the king, good for the gods,\
> and good for relatives and friends.
>
> In fact, they're good for everyone,\
> well grounded in the true teaching.\
> Rid of the stain of stinginess,\
> they'll enjoy a world of grace."

</article>
<article id="an8.39">

#### [AN 8.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overflowing Merit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhisandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to
heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. What eight?

Firstly, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the Buddha. This is the
first kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the teaching. This
is the second kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the Saṅgha. This is
the third kind of overflowing merit ...

Mendicants, these five gifts are great, primordial, long-standing,
traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since
the beginning. They're not being corrupted now nor will they be.
Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look down on them. What five?

Firstly, a noble disciple gives up killing living creatures. By so doing
they give to countless sentient beings the gift of freedom from fear,
enmity, and ill will. And they themselves also enjoy unlimited freedom
from fear, enmity, and ill will. This is the first gift that is a great
offering, primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. It is
uncorrupted, as it has been since the beginning. It's not being
corrupted now nor will it be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don't look
down on it. This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple gives up stealing. ... This is the fifth
kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple gives up sexual misconduct. ... This is
the sixth kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple gives up lying. ... This is the seventh
kind of overflowing merit ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple gives up alcoholic drinks that cause
negligence. By so doing they give to countless sentient beings the gift
of freedom from fear, enmity, and ill will. And they themselves also
enjoy unlimited freedom from fear, enmity, and ill will. This is the
fifth gift that is a great offering, primordial, long-standing,
traditional, and ancient. It is uncorrupted, as it has been since the
beginning. It's not being corrupted now nor will it be. Sensible
ascetics and brahmins don't look down on it. This is the eighth kind of
overflowing merit ...

These are the eight kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness.
They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness."

</article>
<article id="an8.40">

#### [AN 8.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Results of Misconduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duccaritavipākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the killing of living creatures, when cultivated,
developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost
realm. The minimum result it leads to for a human being is a short life
span.

Stealing, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the
animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads to for a
human being is loss of wealth.

Sexual misconduct, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to
hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads
to for a human being is rivalry and enmity.

Lying, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the
animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads to for a
human being is false accusations.

Divisive speech, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to
hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads
to for a human being is being divided against friends.

Harsh speech, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to hell,
the animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads to for
a human being is hearing disagreeable things.

Talking nonsense, when cultivated, developed, and practiced, leads to
hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. The minimum result it leads
to for a human being is that no-one takes what you say seriously.

Taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence, when cultivated,
developed, and practiced, leads to hell, the animal realm, or the ghost
realm. The minimum result it leads to for a human being is madness."

</article>

[]{#an8-uposathavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Sabbath {#an8-uposathavagga.xhtml_an8-uposathavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.41">

#### [AN 8.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Sabbath With Eight Factors, In Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittūposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is
very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. And how should
it be observed? It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they
live, the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing
the rod and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of
sympathy for all living beings. I, too, for this day and night will give
up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be
scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I
will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this
respect.' This is its first factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take
only what's given, and expect only what's given. They keep themselves
clean by not thieving. I, too, for this day and night will give up
stealing. I'll take only what's given, and expect only what's given.
I'll keep myself clean by not thieving. I will observe the sabbath by
doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is its second
factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I, too, for this
day and night will give up unchastity. I will be celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I will observe the sabbath by doing as
the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is its third factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the
truth and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't
trick the world with their words. I, too, for this day and night will
give up lying. I'll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I'll be
honest and trustworthy, and won't trick the world with my words. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'
This is its fourth factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up alcoholic drinks that
cause negligence. I, too, for this day and night will give up alcoholic
drinks that cause negligence. I will observe the sabbath by doing as the
perfected ones do in this respect.' This is its fifth factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. I, too,
for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night and food at the wrong time. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is its sixth
factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up seeing shows of
dancing, singing, and music ; and beautifying and adorning themselves
with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I, too, for this day and night
will give up seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music ; and
beautifying and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I
will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this
respect.' This is its seventh factor.

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I,
too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll
sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is
its eighth factor.

The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors in this way is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful."

</article>
<article id="an8.42">

#### [AN 8.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Sabbath With Eight Factors, In Detail ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitthatūposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is
very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. And how should
it be observed?

It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the
perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and
the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for
all living beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing
living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous
and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'
This is its first factor. ...

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I,
too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll
sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is
its eighth factor. The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors
in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla,
Cetī, Vaccha, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra,
and Kamboja---full of the seven kinds of precious things. This wouldn't
be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. Why is
that? Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness
of the gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the four great kings is
five hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of
the thirty-three. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the thirty-three is a
thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
thirty-three. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Two hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
of Yama. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make up a
year. The life span of the gods of Yama is two thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Four hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
joyful gods. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make
up a year. The life span of the joyful gods is four thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the joyful gods. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Eight hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
who love to imagine. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such
months make up a year. The life span of the gods who love to imagine is
eight thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods who love
to imagine. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human kingship
is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The life span of the gods who
control what is imagined by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink alcohol.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed, `<j>`{=html}or a mat on the ground.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha, `<j>`{=html}who has gone to suffering's end.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or lustrous gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the sabbath with its eight factors,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

</article>
<article id="an8.43">

#### [AN 8.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Visākhā on the Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Visākhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse
of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then Visākhā, Migāra's
mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to her:

"Visākhā, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. And how should it be
observed? It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live,
the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy
for all living beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up
killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be
scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I
will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this
respect.' This is its first factor. ...

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I,
too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll
sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is
its eighth factor. The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors
in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla,
Cetī, Vaccha, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra,
and Kamboja---full of the seven kinds of precious things. This wouldn't
be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. Why is
that? Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness
of the gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the four great kings is
five hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of
the thirty-three. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the thirty-three is a
thousand of these divine years. It's possible that some woman or man who
has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks
up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
thirty-three. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Two hundred years in the human realm ...

Four hundred years in the human realm ...

Eight hundred years in the human realm ...

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The life span of the gods who
control what is imagined by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink alcohol.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed, `<j>`{=html}or a mat on the ground.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha, `<j>`{=html}who has gone to suffering's end.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or lustrous gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the sabbath with its eight factors,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

</article>
<article id="an8.44">

#### [AN 8.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vāseṭṭha on the Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vāseṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then the layman Vāseṭṭha went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Vāseṭṭha, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful ... blameless, they
go to a heavenly place."

When he said this, Vāseṭṭha said to the Buddha:

"If my loved ones---relatives and kin---were to observe this sabbath
with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare and
happiness. If all the aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were
to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their
lasting welfare and happiness."

"That's so true, Vāseṭṭha! That's so true, Vāseṭṭha! If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to observe this
sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting welfare
and happiness. If the whole world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---were
to observe this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their
lasting welfare and happiness. If these great sal trees were to observe
this sabbath with its eight factors, it would be for their lasting
welfare and happiness---if they were sentient. How much more then a
human being!"

</article>
<article id="an8.45">

#### [AN 8.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bojjhā on the Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bojjhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the laywoman Bojjhā went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her:

"Bojjhā, the observance of the sabbath with its eight factors is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. And how should it be
observed?

It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the
perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and
the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for
all living beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing
living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous
and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'
This is its first factor. ...

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I,
too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll
sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is
its eighth factor. The observance of the sabbath with its eight factors
in this way is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla,
Cetī, Vaccha, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra,
and Kamboja---full of the seven kinds of precious things. This wouldn't
be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. Why is
that? Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness
of the gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The life span of the gods of the four great kings is
five hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm ...

Two hundred years in the human realm ...

Four hundred years in the human realm ...

Eight hundred years in the human realm ...

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The life span of the gods who
Control what is imagined by Others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink alcohol.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed, `<j>`{=html}or a mat on the ground.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha, `<j>`{=html}who has gone to suffering's end.
> `</j>`{=html}
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or pure gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the mind developed with love,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

</article>
<article id="an8.46">

#### [AN 8.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Anuruddha and the Agreeable Deities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anuruddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Anuruddha had gone into retreat for the day's
meditation. Then several deities of the Lovable Host went up to
Venerable Anuruddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Honorable Anuruddha, we are the deities called 'Lovable'. We wield
authority and control over three things. We can turn any color we want
on the spot. We can get any voice that we want on the spot. We can get
any pleasure that we want on the spot. We are the deities called
'Lovable'. We wield authority and control over these three things."

Then Venerable Anuruddha thought, "If only these deities would all turn
blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned with blue!" Then those
deities, knowing Anuruddha's thought, all turned blue.

Then Venerable Anuruddha thought, "If only these deities would all turn
yellow ..."

"If only these gods would all turn red ..."

"If only these gods would all turn white ..." Then those deities,
knowing Anuruddha's thought, all turned white.

Then one of those deities sang, one danced, and one snapped her fingers.
Suppose there was a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had
practiced well and kept excellent rhythm. They'd sound graceful,
tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating. In the same way the
performance by those deities sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous,
lovely, and intoxicating. But Venerable Anuruddha averted his senses.

Then those deities, thinking "Master Anuruddha isn't enjoying this,"
vanished right there. Then in the late afternoon, Anuruddha came out of
retreat and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told
him what had happened, adding:

"How many qualities do females have so that---when their body breaks up,
after death---they are reborn in company with the gods of the lovable
host?"

"Anuruddha, when they have eight qualities females---when their body
breaks up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods of the
lovable host. What eight?

Take the case of a female whose mother and father give her to a husband
wanting what's best for her, out of kindness and sympathy. She would get
up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely
and speaking politely.

She honors, respects, esteems, and venerates those her husband respects,
such as mother and father, and ascetics and brahmins. And when they
arrive she serves them with a seat and water.

She's deft and tireless in her husband's household duties, such as
knitting and sewing. She understands how to go about things in order to
complete and organize the work.

She knows what work her husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and
workers have completed, and what they've left incomplete. She knows who
is sick, and who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair
portion of fresh and cooked foods.

She ensures that any income her husband earns is guarded and protected,
whether money, grain, silver, or gold. She doesn't overspend, steal,
waste, or lose it.

She's a lay follower who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, his
teaching, and the Saṅgha.

She's ethical. She doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.

She's generous. She lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.

When they have these eight qualities females---when their body breaks
up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods of the lovable
host.

> She'd never look down on her husband,\
> who's always eager to work hard,\
> always looking after her,\
> and bringing whatever she wants.
>
> And a good woman never scolds her husband\
> with jealous words.\
> Being astute, she reveres\
> those respected by her husband.
>
> She gets up early, works tirelessly,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> A lady who fulfills these duties\
> according to her husband's desire,\
> is reborn among the gods\
> called 'Lovable'."

</article>
<article id="an8.47">

#### [AN 8.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Visākhā on the lovable gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavisākhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse
of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then Visākhā, Migāra's
mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to her:

"Visākhā, when they have eight qualities females---when their body
breaks up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods of the
lovable host. What eight? Take the case of a female whose mother and
father give her to a husband wanting what's best for her, out of
kindness and sympathy. She would get up before him and go to bed after
him, and be obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely. ...

She's generous. She lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share. When they have these eight qualities females---when
their body breaks up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods
of the lovable host.

> She'd never look down on her husband,\
> who's always eager to work hard,\
> always looking after her,\
> and bringing whatever she wants.
>
> And a good woman never scolds her husband\
> with jealous words.\
> Being astute, she reveres\
> those respected by her husband.
>
> She gets up early, works tirelessly,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> A lady who fulfills these duties\
> according to her husband's desire,\
> is reborn among the gods\
> called 'Lovable'."

</article>
<article id="an8.48">

#### [AN 8.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nakula's Mother on the lovable gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nakulamātāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. Then the housewife
Nakula's mother went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.
The Buddha said to her:

"Nakula's mother, when they have eight qualities females---when their
body breaks up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods of the
lovable host. What eight?

Take the case of a female whose mother and father give her to a husband
wanting what's best for her, out of kindness and sympathy. She would get
up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely
and speaking politely.

She honors, respects, esteems, and venerates those her husband respects,
such as mother and father, and ascetics and brahmins. And when they
arrive she serves them with a seat and water.

She's deft and tireless in her husband's household duties, such as
knitting and sewing. She understands how to go about things in order to
complete and organize the work.

She knows what work her husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and
workers have completed, and what they've left incomplete. She knows who
is sick, and who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair
portion of fresh and cooked foods.

She ensures that any income her husband earns is guarded and protected,
whether money, grain, silver, or gold. She doesn't overspend, steal,
waste, or lose it.

She's a lay follower who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, his
teaching, and the Saṅgha.

She's ethical. She doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or use alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.

She's generous. She lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.

When they have these eight qualities females---when their body breaks
up, after death---are reborn in company with the gods of the lovable
host.

> She'd never look down on her husband,\
> who's always eager to work hard,\
> always looking after her,\
> and bringing whatever she wants.
>
> And a good woman never scolds her husband\
> with jealous words.\
> Being astute, she reveres\
> those respected by her husband.
>
> She gets up early, works tirelessly,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> A lady who fulfills these duties\
> according to her husband's desire,\
> is reborn among the gods\
> called 'Lovable'."

</article>
<article id="an8.49">

#### [AN 8.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Winning in This Life (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaidhalokikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse
of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then Visākhā, Migāra's
mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to her:

"Visākhā, a female who has four qualities is practicing to win in this
life, and she succeeds at it. What four? It's when a female is
well-organized at work, manages the domestic help, acts lovingly toward
her husband, and preserves his earnings.

And how is a female well-organized at work? It's when she's deft and
tireless in doing domestic duties for her husband, such as knitting and
sewing. She understands how to go about things in order to complete and
organize the work. That's how a female is well-organized at work.

And how does a female manage the domestic help? It's when she knows what
work her husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and workers have
completed, and what they've left incomplete. She knows who is sick, and
who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair portion of fresh
and cooked foods. That's how a female manages the domestic help.

And how does a female act lovingly toward her husband? It's when a
female would not transgress in any way that her husband would not
consider lovable, even for the sake of her own life. That's how a female
acts lovingly toward her husband.

And how does a female preserve his earnings? It's when she ensures that
any income her husband earns is guarded and protected, whether money,
grain, silver, or gold. She doesn't overspend, steal, waste, or lose it.
That's how a female preserves his earnings.

A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in this life,
and she succeeds at it.

A female who has four qualities is practicing to win in the next life,
and she succeeds at it. What four? It's when a female is accomplished in
faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.

And how is a female accomplished in faith? It's when a female has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' That's how a female is accomplished in
faith.

And how is a female accomplished in ethics? It's when a female doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. That's how a female is
accomplished in ethics.

And how is a female accomplished in generosity? It's when she lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
That's how a female is accomplished in generosity.

And how is a female accomplished in wisdom? It's when a female is wise.
She has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. That's how a
female is accomplished in wisdom.

A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in the next
life, and she succeeds at it.

> She's organized at work,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> she always purifies the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so, a lady in whom\
> these eight qualities are found\
> is known as virtuous,\
> firm in principle, and truthful.
>
> Accomplished in sixteen respects,\
> complete with the eight factors,\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> is reborn in the realm of the lovable gods."

</article>
<article id="an8.50">

#### [AN 8.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Winning in This Life (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaidhalokikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a female who has four qualities is practicing to win in
this life, and she succeeds at it. What four?

It's when a female is well-organized at work, manages the domestic help,
acts lovingly toward her husband, and preserves his earnings.

And how is a female well-organized at work? It's when she's skilled and
tireless in doing domestic duties for her husband ... That's how a
female is well-organized at work.

And how does a female manage the domestic help? It's when she knows what
work her husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and workers have
completed, and what they've left incomplete. She knows who is sick, and
who is fit or unwell. She distributes to each a fair portion of fresh
and cooked foods. That's how a female manages the domestic help.

And how does a female act lovingly toward her husband? It's when a
female would not transgress in any way that her husband would not
consider lovable, even for the sake of her own life. That's how a female
acts lovingly toward her husband.

And how does a female preserve his earnings? It's when she tries to
guard and protect any income her husband earns ... That's how a female
preserves his earnings.

A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in this life,
and she succeeds at it.

A female who has four qualities is practicing to win in the next life,
and she succeeds at it. What four? It's when a female is accomplished in
faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.

And how is a female accomplished in faith? It's when a female has faith
in the Realized One's awakening ... That's how a female is accomplished
in faith.

And how is a female accomplished in ethics? It's when a female doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. That's how a female is
accomplished in ethics.

And how is a female accomplished in generosity? It's when she lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
That's how a female is accomplished in generosity.

And how is a female accomplished in wisdom? It's when a female is wise.
She has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. That's how a
female is accomplished in wisdom.

A female who has these four qualities is practicing to win in the next
life, and she succeeds at it.

> She's organized at work,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's lovable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> being bountiful and rid of stinginess.\
> She always purifies the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so, a lady in whom\
> these eight qualities are found\
> is known as virtuous,\
> firm in principle, and truthful.
>
> Accomplished in sixteen respects,\
> complete with the eight factors,\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> is reborn in the realm of the lovable gods."

</article>

[]{#an8-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an8-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an8-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Gotamī {#an8-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an8-gotamivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.51">

#### [AN 8.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Gotamī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gotamīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī went
up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, please let females gain the going forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One."

"Enough, Gotamī. Don't endorse the going forth for females from the lay
life to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One."

For a second time ...

For a third time, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī said to the Buddha:

"Sir, please let females gain the going forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One."

"Enough, Gotamī. Don't endorse the going forth for females from the lay
life to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One."

Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī thought, "The Buddha does not permit females to
go forth." Miserable and sad, weeping, with a tearful face, she bowed,
and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on her right, before
leaving.

When the Buddha had stayed in Kapilavatthu as long as he pleased, he set
out for Vesālī. Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Vesālī, where he
stayed at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then
Mahāpajāpati Gotamī had her hair shaved, and dressed in ocher robes.
Together with several Sakyan ladies she set out for Vesālī. Traveling
stage by stage, she arrived at Vesālī and went to the Great Wood, the
hall with the peaked roof. Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī stood crying outside
the gate, her feet swollen, her limbs covered with dust, miserable and
sad, with tearful face.

Venerable Ānanda saw her standing there, and said to her, "Gotamī, why
do you stand crying outside the gate, your feet swollen, your limbs
covered with dust, miserable and sad, with tearful face?"

"Honorable Ānanda, it's because the Buddha does not permit females to go
forth in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One."

"Well then, Gotamī, wait here an hour while I ask the Buddha to grant
the going forth for females."

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī is standing crying outside the gate, her feet
swollen, her limbs covered with dust, miserable and sad, with tearful
face. She says that it's because the Buddha does not permit females to
go forth. Sir, please let females gain the going forth from the lay life
to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One."

"Enough, Ānanda. Don't endorse the going forth for females from the lay
life to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One."

For a second time ...

For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, please let females gain the going forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One."

"Enough, Ānanda. Don't endorse the going forth for females from the lay
life to homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the
Realized One."

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "The Buddha does not permit females to go
forth. Why don't I try another approach?"

Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, is a female able to
realize the fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and
perfection once she has gone forth?"

"She is able, Ānanda."

"If a female is able to realize the fruits of stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and perfection once she has gone forth. Sir, Mahāpajāpati
has been very helpful to the Buddha. She is his aunt who raised him,
nurtured him, and gave him her milk. When the Buddha's birth mother
passed away, she nurtured him at her own breast. Sir, please let females
gain the going forth from the lay life to homelessness in the teaching
and training proclaimed by the Realized One."

"Ānanda, if Mahāpajāpati Gotamī accepts these eight principles of
respect, that will be her ordination.

A nun, even if she has been ordained for a hundred years, should bow
down to a monk who was ordained that very day. She should rise up for
him, greet him with joined palms, and observe proper etiquette toward
him. This principle should be honored, respected, esteemed, and
venerated, and not transgressed so long as life lasts.

A nun should not commence the rainy season residence in a monastery
without monks. This principle should be honored, respected, esteemed,
and venerated, and not transgressed so long as life lasts.

Each fortnight the nuns should expect two things from the community of
monks: the date of the sabbath, and visiting for advice. This principle
should be honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not
transgressed so long as life lasts.

After completing the rainy season residence the nuns should invite
admonition from the communities of both monks and nuns in regard to
anything that was seen, heard, or suspected. This principle should be
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not transgressed so
long as life lasts.

A nun who has committed a grave offense should undergo penance in the
communities of both monks and nuns for a fortnight. This principle
should be honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not
transgressed so long as life lasts.

A trainee nun who has trained in the six rules for two years should seek
ordination from the communities of both monks and nuns. This principle
should be honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not
transgressed so long as life lasts.

A nun should not abuse or insult a monk in any way. This principle
should be honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not
transgressed so long as life lasts.

From this day forth it is forbidden for nuns to criticize monks, but it
is not forbidden for monks to criticize nuns. This principle should be
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not transgressed so
long as life lasts.

If Mahāpajāpati Gotamī accepts these eight principles of respect, that
will be her ordination."

Then Ānanda, having learned these eight principles of respect from the
Buddha himself, went to Mahāpajāpati Gotamī and said:

"Gotamī, if you accept eight principles of respect, that will be your
ordination.

A nun, even if she has been ordained for a hundred years, should bow
down to a monk who was ordained that very day. She should rise up for
him, greet him with joined palms, and observe proper etiquette toward
him. This principle should be honored, respected, esteemed, and
venerated, and not transgressed so long as life lasts. ...

From this day forth it is forbidden for nuns to criticize monks, but it
is not forbidden for monks to criticize nuns. This principle should be
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, and not transgressed so
long as life lasts. If you accept these eight principles of respect,
that will be your ordination."

"Ānanda, suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and
fond of adornments, and had bathed their head. After getting a garland
of lotuses, jasmine, or liana flowers, they would take them in both
hands and place them on the crown of the head. In the same way, sir, I
accept these eight principles of respect as not to be transgressed so
long as life lasts."

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī has accepted the eight principles of respect
as not to be transgressed so long as life lasts."

"Ānanda, if females had not gained the going forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One, the spiritual life would have lasted long. The true teaching would
have remained for a thousand years. But since they have gained the going
forth, now the spiritual life will not last long. The true teaching will
remain only five hundred years.

It's like those families with many women and few men. They're easy prey
for bandits and thieves. In the same way, the spiritual life does not
last long in a teaching and training where females gain the going forth.

It's like a field full of rice. Once the disease called 'white bones'
attacks, it doesn't last long. In the same way, the spiritual life does
not last long in a teaching and training where females gain the going
forth.

It's like a field full of sugar cane. Once the disease called 'red rot'
attacks, it doesn't last long. In the same way, the spiritual life does
not last long in a teaching and training where females gain the going
forth.

As a man might build a dyke around a large lake as a precaution against
the water overflowing, in the same way as a precaution I've prescribed
the eight principles of respect as not to be transgressed so long as
life lasts."

</article>
<article id="an8.52">

#### [AN 8.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Adviser for Nuns ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ovādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, how many qualities should a monk have to be deemed an adviser for
nuns?"

"Ānanda, a monk with eight qualities may be deemed an adviser for nuns.
What eight?

Firstly, a monk is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in
the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These
teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well
analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and
accompanying material.

They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and
expresses the meaning.

They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the community
of nuns.

They're likable and agreeable to most of the nuns.

They have never previously sexually harassed any woman wearing the ocher
robe who has gone forth in the Buddha's name.

They have been ordained for twenty years or more.

A monk with these eight qualities may be deemed an adviser for nuns."

</article>
<article id="an8.53">

#### [AN 8.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Brief Advice to Gotamī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī went up to the
Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Gotamī, you might know that certain things lead to passion, not
dispassion; to yoking, not to unyoking; to accumulation, not dispersal;
to more desires, not fewer; to lack of contentment, not contentment; to
crowding, not seclusion; to laziness, not energy; to being burdensome,
not being unburdensome. Categorically, you should remember these things
as not the teaching, not the training, and not the Teacher's
instructions.

You might know that certain things lead to dispassion, not passion; to
unyoking, not to yoking; to dispersal, not accumulation; to fewer
desires, not more; to contentment, not lack of contentment; to
seclusion, not crowding; to energy, not laziness; to being unburdensome,
not being burdensome. Categorically, you should remember these things as
the teaching, the training, and the Teacher's instructions."

</article>
<article id="an8.54">

#### [AN 8.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Dīghajāṇu ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dīghajāṇusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where
they have a town named Kakkarapatta. Then Dīghajāṇu the Koliyan went up
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, we are laypeople who enjoy sensual pleasures and living at home
with our children. We use sandalwood imported from Kāsi, we wear
garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and we accept gold and currency. May
the Buddha please teach us the Dhamma in a way that leads to our welfare
and happiness in this life and in future lives."

"Byagghapajja, these four things lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in this life. What four?

Accomplishment in initiative, protection, good friendship, and balanced
finances. And what is accomplishment in initiative? It's when a
gentleman earns a living by means such as farming, trade, raising
cattle, archery, government service, or one of the professions. He
understands how to go about these things in order to complete and
organize the work. This is called accomplishment in initiative.

And what is accomplishment in protection? It's when a gentleman owns
legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative,
built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. He
ensures it is guarded and protected, thinking: 'How can I prevent my
wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept
away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?' This is called accomplishment
in protection.

And what is accomplishment in good friendship? It's when a gentleman
resides in a town or village. And in that place there are householders
or their children who may be young or old, but are mature in conduct,
accomplished in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. He associates
with them, converses and engages in discussion. And he emulates the same
kind of accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. This is
called accomplishment in good friendship.

And what is accomplishment in balanced finances? It's when a gentleman,
knowing his income and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither
too extravagant nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will
exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' It's like an appraiser or their
apprentice who, holding up the scales, knows that it's low by this much
or high by this much. In the same way, a gentleman, knowing his income
and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither too extravagant
nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will exceed my
expenditure, not the reverse.' If a gentleman has little income but an
opulent life, people will say: 'This gentleman eats their wealth like a
fig-eater!' If a gentleman has a large income but a spartan life, people
will say: 'This gentleman is starving themselves to death!' But a
gentleman, knowing his income and expenditure, leads a balanced life,
neither too extravagant nor too frugal, thinking, 'In this way my income
will exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' This is called
accomplishment in balanced finances.

There are four drains on wealth that has been gathered in this way.
Womanizing, drinking, gambling, and having bad friends, companions, and
associates. Suppose there was a large reservoir with four inlets and
four drains. And someone was to open up the drains and close off the
inlets, and the heavens don't provide enough rain. You'd expect that
large reservoir to dwindle, not expand. In the same way, there are four
drains on wealth that has been gathered in this way. Womanizing,
drinking, gambling, and having bad friends, companions, and associates.

There are four inlets for wealth that has been gathered in this way. Not
womanizing, drinking, or gambling, and having good friends, companions,
and associates. Suppose there was a large reservoir with four inlets and
four drains. And someone was to open up the inlets and close off the
drains, and the heavens provide plenty of rain. You'd expect that large
reservoir to expand, not dwindle. In the same way, there are four inlets
for wealth that has been gathered in this way. Not womanizing, drinking,
or gambling, and having good friends, companions, and associates.

These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in this life.

These four things lead to the welfare and happiness of a gentleman in
future lives. What four? Accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity,
and wisdom.

And what is accomplishment in faith? It's when a gentleman has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called accomplishment in faith.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when a gentleman doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in generosity? It's when a gentleman lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called accomplishment in generosity.

And what is accomplishment in wisdom? It's when a gentleman is wise. He
has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative,
and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called
accomplishment in wisdom.

These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in future lives.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the future lives.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

</article>
<article id="an8.55">

#### [AN 8.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ujjaya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ujjayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Ujjaya the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, we wish to travel abroad. May the Buddha please teach us
the Dhamma in a way that leads to our welfare and happiness in this life
and in future lives."

"Brahmin, these four things lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in this life. What four? Accomplishment in initiative,
protection, good friendship, and balanced finances.

And what is accomplishment in initiative? A gentleman may earn a living
by means such as farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government
service, or one of the professions. He understands how to go about these
things in order to complete and organize the work. This is called
accomplishment in initiative.

And what is accomplishment in protection? It's when a gentleman owns
legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative,
built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. He
ensures it is guarded and protected, thinking: 'How can I prevent my
wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept
away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?' This is called accomplishment
in protection.

And what is accomplishment in good friendship? It's when a gentleman
resides in a town or village. And in that place there are householders
or their children who may be young or old, but are mature in conduct,
accomplished in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. He associates
with them, converses and engages in discussion. And he emulates the same
kind of accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. This is
called accomplishment in good friendship.

And what is accomplishment in balanced finances? It's when a gentleman,
knowing his income and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither
too extravagant nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will
exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' It's like an appraiser or their
apprentice who, holding up the scales, knows that it's low by this much
or high by this much. In the same way, a gentleman, knowing his income
and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither too extravagant
nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will exceed my
expenditure, not the reverse.' If a gentleman has little income but an
opulent life, people will say: 'This gentleman eats their wealth like a
fig-eater!' If a gentleman has a large income but a spartan life, people
will say: 'This gentleman is starving themselves to death!' But a
gentleman, knowing his income and expenditure, leads a balanced life,
neither too extravagant nor too frugal, thinking, 'In this way my income
will exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' This is called
accomplishment in balanced finances.

There are four drains on wealth that has been gathered in this way.
Womanizing, drinking, gambling, and having bad friends, companions, and
associates. Suppose there was a large reservoir with four inlets and
four drains. And someone was to open up the drains and close off the
inlets, and the heavens don't provide enough rain. You'd expect that
large reservoir to dwindle, not expand. In the same way, there are four
drains on wealth that has been gathered in this way. Womanizing,
drinking, gambling, and having bad friends, companions, and associates.

There are four inlets for wealth that has been gathered in this way. Not
womanizing, drinking, or gambling, and having good friends, companions,
and associates. Suppose there was a large reservoir with four inlets and
four drains. And someone was to open up the inlets and close off the
drains, and the heavens provide plenty of rain. You'd expect that large
reservoir to expand, not dwindle. In the same way, there are four inlets
for wealth that has been gathered in this way. Not womanizing, drinking,
or gambling, and having good friends, companions, and associates.

These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in this life.

These four things lead to the welfare and happiness of a gentleman in
future lives. What four? Accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity,
and wisdom.

And what is accomplishment in faith? It's when a gentleman has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called accomplishment in faith.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when a gentleman doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in generosity? It's when a gentleman lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called accomplishment in generosity.

And what is accomplishment in wisdom? It's when a gentleman is wise. He
has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative,
and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called
accomplishment in wisdom.

These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a
gentleman in future lives.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

</article>
<article id="an8.56">

#### [AN 8.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Danger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, 'danger' is a term for sensual pleasures. 'Suffering',
'disease', 'boil', 'dart', 'snare', 'bog', and 'womb' are terms for
sensual pleasures. And why is 'danger' a term for sensual pleasures?
Someone who is besotted by sensual greed and shackled by lustful desire
is not freed from dangers in the present life or in lives to come. That
is why 'danger' is a term for sensual pleasures. And why are
'suffering', 'disease', 'boil', 'dart', 'snare', 'bog', and 'womb' terms
for sensual pleasures? Someone who is besotted by sensual greed and
shackled by lustful desire is not freed from wombs in the present life
or in lives to come. That is why 'womb' is a term for sensual pleasures.

> Danger, suffering, and disease,\
> boil, dart, and snare,\
> and bogs and wombs both.\
> These describe the sensual pleasures\
> to which ordinary people are attached.
>
> Swamped by things that seem pleasant,\
> you go to another womb.\
> But when a mendicant is keen,\
> and doesn't forget awareness,
>
> in this way they transcend\
> this grueling swamp.\
> They watch this population flounder,\
> fallen into rebirth and old age."

</article>
<article id="an8.57">

#### [AN 8.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What eight?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These
teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They have good friends, companions, and associates.

They have right view, possessing right perspective.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, they see how
sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an8.58">

#### [AN 8.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world. What eight?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These
teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They live with energy roused up. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings.

They prevail over desire and discontent, and live having mastered desire
and discontent whenever they arose.

They prevail over fear and dread, and live having mastered fear and
dread whenever they arose.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an8.59">

#### [AN 8.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eight People (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapuggalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these eight people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What eight? The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize
the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the one
practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and
the one practicing for perfection. These are the eight people who are
worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are
the supreme field of merit for the world.

> Four practicing the path,\
> and four established in the fruit.\
> This is the upright Saṅgha,\
> with wisdom, ethics, and immersion.
>
> For humans, those merit-seeking creatures,\
> who sponsor sacrifices,\
> making worldly merit,\
> what is given to the Saṅgha is very fruitful."

</article>
<article id="an8.60">

#### [AN 8.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eight People (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapuggalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these eight people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What eight? The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize
the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the one
practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and
the one practicing for perfection. These are the eight people who are
worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are
the supreme field of merit for the world.

> Four practicing the path,\
> and four established in the fruit.\
> This is the exalted Saṅgha,\
> the eight people among sentient beings.
>
> For humans, those merit-seeking creatures,\
> who sponsor sacrifices,\
> making worldly merit,\
> what's given here is very fruitful."

</article>

[]{#an8-bhumicalavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Earthquakes {#an8-bhumicalavagga.xhtml_an8-bhumicalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.61">

#### [AN 8.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Desire ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Icchāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these eight are found in the world. What eight?

First, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. And so they sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion because
they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant who
lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. And so they become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they acquire material
things, they become intoxicated and negligent. They've fallen from the
true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. And so they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true
teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. And so they
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. But when
they acquire material things, they become intoxicated and negligent.
They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. But they don't sorrow
and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion
because they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant
who lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. But they don't become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they acquire material
things, they don't become intoxicated and negligent. They haven't fallen
from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. But they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from
the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. But they don't
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. And when
they acquire material things, they don't become intoxicated and
negligent. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

These are the eight people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an8.62">

#### [AN 8.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Enough ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Alaṁsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is good enough for
themselves and others. What six? A mendicant is quick-witted when it
comes to skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've
heard. They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized.
Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly.
They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and
expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these six qualities is good
enough for themselves and others.

A mendicant with five qualities is good enough for themselves and
others. What five? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good
speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the
meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these five qualities is good enough for
themselves and others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. But they're not
a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and
doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and
inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four
qualities is good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. But they're not
a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and
doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and
inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three
qualities is good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. But they examine the meaning of teachings they have
memorized. Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice
accordingly. They're not a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished,
clear, articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. Nor do they examine the meaning of teachings they've
memorized. Not understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't
practice accordingly. But they're a good speaker. Their voice is
polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves."

</article>
<article id="an8.63">

#### [AN 8.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Teaching in Brief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁkhittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"This is exactly how some silly people ask me for something. But when
the teaching has been explained they think only of following me around."

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy One
teach me the Dhamma in brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of
what the Buddha says! Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's
teaching!"

"Well then, mendicant, you should train like this: 'My mind will be
steady and well settled internally. And bad, unskillful qualities that
have arisen will not occupy my mind.' That's how you should train.

When your mind is steady and well settled internally, and bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen don't occupy your mind, then you
should train like this: 'I will develop the heart's release by love.
I'll cultivate it, make it my vehicle and my basis, keep it up,
consolidate it, and properly implement it.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected.
You should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected.
You should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without
rapture. You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should train like this: 'I will develop the heart's release by
compassion ...' ... 'I will develop the heart's release by rejoicing
...' ... 'I will develop the heart's release by equanimity. I'll
cultivate it, make it my vehicle and my basis, keep it up, consolidate
it, and properly implement it.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected.
You should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected.
You should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without
rapture. You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should train like this: 'I'll meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected.
You should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected.
You should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without
rapture. You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should train like this: 'I'll meditate on an aspect of feelings ...' ...
'I'll meditate on an aspect of the mind ...' ... 'I'll meditate on an
aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way, you
should develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected.
You should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected.
You should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without
rapture. You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed and cultivated in this way,
wherever you walk, you'll walk comfortably. Wherever you stand, you'll
stand comfortably. Wherever you sit, you'll sit comfortably. Wherever
you lie down, you'll lie down comfortably."

When that mendicant had been given this advice by the Buddha, he got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

</article>
<article id="an8.64">

#### [AN 8.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Gayā Head ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gayāsīsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Gayā on Gayā Head. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still not awake but intent
on awakening---I perceived light but did not see forms.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to both perceive light and see
forms? Then my knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time, living diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived
light and saw forms. But I didn't associate with those deities,
converse, or engage in discussion.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion?
Then my knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time ... I perceived light and saw forms. And I associated
with those deities, conversed, and engaged in discussion. But I didn't
know which orders of gods those deities came from.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion;
and find out which orders of gods those deities come from? Then my
knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time ... I perceived light and saw forms. And I associated
with those deities ... And I found out which orders of gods those
deities came from. But I didn't know what deeds caused those deities to
be reborn there after passing away from here.

So after some time ... I found out what deeds caused those deities to be
reborn there after passing away from here. But I didn't know what deeds
caused those deities to have such food and such an experience of
pleasure and pain.

So after some time ... I found out what deeds caused those deities to
have such food and such an experience of pleasure and pain. But I didn't
know that these deities have a life-span of such a length.

So after some time ... I found out that these deities have a life-span
of such a length. But I didn't know whether or not I had previously
lived together with those deities.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion;
and find out which orders of gods those deities come from; and what
deeds caused those deities to be reborn there after passing away from
here; and what deeds caused those deities to have such food and such an
experience of pleasure and pain; and that these deities have a life-span
of such a length; and whether or not I have previously lived together
with those deities? Then my knowledge and vision would become even more
purified.'

So after some time ... I found out whether or not I have previously
lived together with those deities.

As long as my knowledge and vision about the deities was not fully
purified in these eight rounds, I didn't announce my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when my knowledge and vision about the deities was fully purified in
these eight rounds, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. Knowledge and vision arose
in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there'll
be no more future lives.'"

</article>
<article id="an8.65">

#### [AN 8.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dimensions of Mastery ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhibhāyatanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight dimensions of mastery. What eight?

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I
know and see.' This is the fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, yellow,
with yellow color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive:
'I know and see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, red, with
red color and red appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, white,
with white color and white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I
know and see.' This is the eighth dimension of mastery.

These are the eight dimensions of mastery."

</article>
<article id="an8.66">

#### [AN 8.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Liberations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vimokkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight liberations. What eight? Having
physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. This is the
second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations."

</article>
<article id="an8.67">

#### [AN 8.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ignoble Expressions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anariyavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight ignoble expressions. What eight?
Saying you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, but you haven't.
And saying you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you
have. These are the eight ignoble expressions."

</article>
<article id="an8.68">

#### [AN 8.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Noble Expressions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyavohārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight noble expressions. What eight? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you haven't.
And saying you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you
have. These are the eight noble expressions."

</article>
<article id="an8.69">

#### [AN 8.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assemblies ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight assemblies. What eight? The
assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An
assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of
the thirty-three. An assembly of Māras. An assembly of Brahmās.

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. There
I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?'

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins ...
householders ... ascetics ... the gods of the four great kings ... the
gods of the thirty-three ... Māras ... Brahmās. There too I used to sit
with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my appearance and
voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged, fired up, and
inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they didn't know:
'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when my Dhamma
talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't know: 'Who
was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?' These are the eight
assemblies."

</article>
<article id="an8.70">

#### [AN 8.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Earthquakes ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhūmicālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, get your sitting
cloth. Let's go to the Cāpāla shrine for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla shrine, where he sat on the seat
spread out. When he was seated he said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many
Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has
developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power---made them a
vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the
Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

For a second time ...

And for a third time, the Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many
Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has
developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power---made them a
vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the
Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Go now, Ānanda, at your
convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked said to the
Buddha:

"Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully quenched! May the Holy One
now become fully quenched! Now is the time for the Buddha to become
fully quenched.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not become fully
quenched until I have monk disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice in line
with the teachings; not until they practice appropriately, living in
line with the teaching; not until they've learned their tradition, and
explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal; not
until they can legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of
others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.' Today you do
have such monk disciples.

May the Blessed One now become fully quenched! May the Holy One now
become fully quenched! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully
quenched.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not become fully
quenched until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...' ...

'Wicked One, I shall not become fully quenched until I have layman
disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ...

'Wicked One, I shall not become fully quenched until I have laywoman
disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ... Today
you do have such laywoman disciples.

Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully quenched! May the Holy One
become fully quenched! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully
quenched. Sir, you once made this statement:

'Wicked One, I shall not become fully quenched until my spiritual path
is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.' Today your spiritual
path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and
well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.

Sir, may the Blessed One now become fully quenched! May the Holy One
become fully quenched! Now is the time for the Buddha to become fully
quenched."

"Relax, Wicked One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be
soon. Three months from now the Realized One will finally be
extinguished."

So at the Cāpāla Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware, surrendered
the life force. When he did so there was a great earthquake,
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky. Then,
understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this
heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable `<j>`{=html}with the creation of prolonged
> life, `</j>`{=html}\
> the sage surrendered the life force.\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor."

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "That was a really big earthquake! That
was really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky! What's the cause, what's the reason for a great
earthquake?"

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, that was a really big earthquake! That was
really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky! What's the cause, what's the reason for a great
earthquake?"

"Ānanda, there are these eight causes and reasons for a great
earthquake. What eight?

This great earth is grounded on water, the water is grounded on air, and
the air stands in space. At a time when a great wind blows, it stirs the
water, and the water stirs the earth. This is the first cause and reason
for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, there is an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power who has
achieved mastery of the mind, or a god who is mighty and powerful.
They've developed a limited perception of earth and a limitless
perception of water. They make the earth shake and rock and tremble.
This is the second cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening passes away from the
host of joyful gods, he's conceived in his mother's belly, mindful and
aware. Then the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the third
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening comes out of his
mother's belly mindful and aware, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles. This is the fourth cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One realizes the supreme perfect
awakening, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the fifth
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the sixth cause
and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One, mindful and aware, surrenders the
life force, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the seventh
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One becomes fully extinguished in the
element of extinguishment with no residue, the earth shakes and rocks
and trembles. This is the eighth cause and reason for a great
earthquake.

These are the eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake."

</article>

[]{#an8-yamakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Pairs {#an8-yamakavagga.xhtml_an8-yamakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.71">

#### [AN 8.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring All Around (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaddhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful and ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and
ethical, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned?' When the mendicant is faithful,
ethical, and learned, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful, ethical, and learned, but not a Dhamma speaker.
... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach Dhamma to the
assembly with assurance ... they don't get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that belong to
the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty ... they
don't realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and
should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and
learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, one who gets the four absorptions
when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of
defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the four absorptions when they want, and one who
lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in
that respect. A mendicant who has these eight qualities is inspiring all
around, and is complete in every respect."

</article>
<article id="an8.72">

#### [AN 8.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring All Around (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaddhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. So they're incomplete in that
respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful and
ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're complete
in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they don't have direct
meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless,
transcending form ... they don't realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in that
respect. A mendicant who has these eight qualities is inspiring all
around, and is complete in every respect."

</article>
<article id="an8.73">

#### [AN 8.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of Death (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamaraṇassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. But do you develop mindfulness of death?"

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, I
develop mindfulness of death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day and
night, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve
a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for half a day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat a single almsmeal, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat half an almsmeal, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow a single mouthful, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out,
I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a
lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

When this was said, the Buddha said to those mendicants:

"The mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to live for
a day and night ... or to live for a day ... or to live for half a day
... or to live as long as it takes to eat a meal of almsfood ... or to
live as long as it takes to eat half a meal of almsfood ... or to live
as long as it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls ... These
are called mendicants who live negligently. They slackly develop
mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.

But the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to live
as long as it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful ... or to live
as long as it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in
after breathing out ... These are called mendicants who live diligently.
They keenly develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.

So you should train like this: 'We will live diligently. We will keenly
develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.' That's how
you should train."

</article>
<article id="an8.74">

#### [AN 8.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness of Death (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamaraṇassatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, when mindfulness of
death is developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. It
culminates in freedom from death and ends in freedom from death.

And how is mindfulness of death developed and cultivated to be very
fruitful and beneficial, to culminate in freedom from death and end in
freedom from death? As day passes by and night draws close, a mendicant
reflects: 'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a
scorpion or centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would
be an obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get
food poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing
winds. Or I might be attacked by humans or non-humans. And if I died
from that it would be an obstacle to my progress.' That mendicant should
reflect: 'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given
up, which might be an obstacle to my progress if I die tonight?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness.

Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Or else, as night passes by and day draws close, a mendicant reflects:
'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or
centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an
obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food
poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds.
Or I might be attacked by humans or non-humans. And if I died from that
it would be an obstacle to my progress.' That mendicant should reflect:
'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given up, which
might be an obstacle to my progress if I die today?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness.

Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.
Mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an8.75">

#### [AN 8.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishments (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight accomplishments. What eight?
Accomplishment in initiative, protection, good friendship, and balanced
finances. And accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.
These are the eight accomplishments.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in lives to come.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

</article>
<article id="an8.76">

#### [AN 8.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishments (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these eight accomplishments. What eight?
Accomplishment in initiative, protection, good friendship, and balanced
finances. And accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.

And what is accomplishment in initiative? It's when a gentleman earns a
living by means such as farming, trade, raising cattle, archery,
government service, or one of the professions. He understands how to go
about these things in order to complete and organize the work. This is
called accomplishment in initiative.

And what is accomplishment in protection? It's when a gentleman owns
legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative,
built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. He
ensures it is guarded and protected, thinking: 'How can I prevent my
wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept
away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?' This is called accomplishment
in protection.

And what is accomplishment in good friendship? It's when a gentleman
resides in a town or village. And in that place there are householders
or their children who may be young or old, but are mature in conduct,
accomplished in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. He associates
with them, converses and engages in discussion. And he emulates the same
kind of accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. This is
called accomplishment in good friendship.

And what is accomplishment in balanced finances? It's when a gentleman,
knowing his income and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither
too extravagant nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will
exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' It's like an appraiser or their
apprentice who, holding up the scales, knows that it's low by this much
or high by this much. In the same way, a gentleman, knowing his income
and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither too extravagant
nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will exceed my
expenditure, not the reverse.' If a gentleman has little income but an
opulent life, people will say: 'This gentleman eats their wealth like a
fig-eater!' If a gentleman has a large income but a spartan life, people
will say: 'This gentleman is starving themselves to death!' But a
gentleman, knowing his income and expenditure, leads a balanced life,
neither too extravagant nor too frugal, thinking, 'In this way my income
will exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' This is called
accomplishment in balanced finances.

And what is accomplishment in faith? It's when a gentleman has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' This
is called accomplishment in faith.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when a gentleman doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in generosity? It's when a gentleman lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called accomplishment in generosity.

And what is accomplishment in wisdom? It's when a gentleman is wise. He
has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative,
and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called
accomplishment in wisdom.

These are the eight accomplishments.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

</article>
<article id="an8.77">

#### [AN 8.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Desires ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Icchāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, these eight people are found in the world. What eight?

First, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. And so they sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion because
they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant who
lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. And so they become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they acquire material
things, they become intoxicated and negligent. They've fallen from the
true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. And so they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they do not acquire
material things, they sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true
teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. And so they
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. But when
they acquire material things, they become intoxicated and negligent.
They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. But they don't sorrow
and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion
because they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant
who lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. But they don't become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they acquire material
things, they don't become intoxicated and negligent. They haven't fallen
from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. But they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from
the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. But they don't
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. And when
they acquire material things, they don't become intoxicated and
negligent. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

These eight people are found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an8.78">

#### [AN 8.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Enough ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Alaṁsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, a mendicant with
six qualities is good enough for themselves and others. What six? A
mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings. They
readily memorize the teachings they've heard. They examine the meaning
of teachings they've memorized. Understanding the meaning and the
teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice
is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these six qualities is good enough for themselves and others.

A mendicant with five qualities is good enough for themselves and
others. What five? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good
speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the
meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these five qualities is good enough for
themselves and others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're not a
good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't
express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four qualities is
good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're not a
good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't
express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three qualities is
good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized.
Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly.
They're not a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear,
articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. Nor do they examine the meaning of teachings they've
memorized. Not understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't
practice accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished,
clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage,
fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these
two qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves."

</article>
<article id="an8.79">

#### [AN 8.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parihānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
eight? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don't guard the
sense doors and they eat too much. They relish closeness and
proliferation. These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

These eight things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.
What eight? They don't relish work, talk, and sleep. They guard the
sense doors, and they don't eat too much. They don't relish closeness
and proliferation. These eight things don't lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee."

</article>
<article id="an8.80">

#### [AN 8.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grounds for Laziness and Arousing Energy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kusītārambhavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are eight grounds for laziness. What eight?

Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work
to do. But while doing it my body will get tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the
second ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
This is the third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the fourth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, rough or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, rough or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for achieving
the unachieved, attaining the unattained, and realizing the unrealized.
This is the fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, rough or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, rough or fine.
My body is heavy, unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load of beans.
I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for
achieving the unachieved, attaining the unattained, and realizing the
unrealized. This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for achieving the
unachieved, attaining the unattained, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the seventh ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for laziness. These
are the eight grounds for laziness.

There are eight grounds for arousing energy. What eight? Firstly, a
mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work to do.
While working it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas.
I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' They rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse up energy ... This is the second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy
...' ... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy
...' ... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, rough or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, rough or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy ...' ... This is the fifth ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, rough or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, rough or fine.
My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse up
energy ...' ... This is the sixth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy ...' ... This is the seventh ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

These are the eight grounds for arousing energy."

</article>

[]{#an8-sativagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Mindfulness {#an8-sativagga.xhtml_an8-sativagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.81">

#### [AN 8.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mindfulness and Situational Awareness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Satisampajaññasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when there is no mindfulness and situational awareness, one
who lacks mindfulness and situational awareness has destroyed a vital
condition for conscience and prudence. When there is no conscience and
prudence, one who lacks conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital
condition for sense restraint. When there is no sense restraint, one who
lacks sense restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical
conduct. When there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has
destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right
immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition
for true knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and
vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital
condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no
disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and
dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is no mindfulness and situational awareness,
one who lacks mindfulness and situational awareness has destroyed a
vital condition for conscience and prudence. When there is no conscience
and prudence ... One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has
destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

When there is mindfulness and situational awareness, one who has
fulfilled mindfulness and situational awareness has fulfilled a vital
condition for conscience and prudence. When there is conscience and
prudence, a person who has fulfilled conscience and prudence has
fulfilled a vital condition for sense restraint. When there is sense
restraint, one who has fulfilled sense restraint has fulfilled a vital
condition for ethical conduct. When there is ethical conduct, one who
has fulfilled ethical conduct has fulfilled a vital condition for right
immersion. When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right
immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.
When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true
knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment
and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who
has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital
condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is mindfulness and situational awareness,
one who has fulfilled mindfulness and situational awareness has
fulfilled a vital condition for conscience and prudence. When there is
conscience and prudence ... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and
dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom."

</article>
<article id="an8.82">

#### [AN 8.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Puṇṇiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puṇṇiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Puṇṇiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes the Realized
One feels inspired to teach, and other times not?"

"Puṇṇiya, when a mendicant has faith but doesn't approach, the Realized
One doesn't feel inspired to teach. But when a mendicant has faith and
approaches, the Realized One feels inspired to teach. When a mendicant
has faith and approaches, but doesn't pay homage ... they pay homage,
but don't ask questions ... they ask questions, but don't actively
listen ... they actively listen, but don't remember the teaching they've
heard ... they remember the teaching they've heard, but don't reflect on
the meaning of the teachings they've remembered ... they reflect on the
meaning of the teachings they've remembered, but, not having understood
the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice accordingly. The
Realized One doesn't feel inspired to teach.

But when a mendicant has faith, approaches, pays homage, asks questions,
actively listens, remembers the teachings, reflects on the meaning, and
practices accordingly, the Realized One feels inspired to teach. When
someone has these eight qualities, the Realized One feels totally
inspired to teach."

</article>
<article id="an8.83">

#### [AN 8.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rooted ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mūlakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core?' How would you answer
them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, I will teach it. Listen and apply your mind
well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core?' You should answer
them: 'Reverends, all things are rooted in desire. They are produced by
application of mind. Contact is their origin. Feeling is their meeting
place. Immersion is their chief. Mindfulness is their ruler. Wisdom is
their overseer. Freedom is their core.' When questioned by wanderers of
other religions, that's how you should answer them."

</article>
<article id="an8.84">

#### [AN 8.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Master Thief ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Corasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a master thief with eight factors is soon executed, and
doesn't have long to live. What eight? He attacks unprovoked. He steals
everything without exception. He kills a woman. He rapes a girl. He robs
a monk. He robs the royal treasury. He works close to home. He's not
skilled at hiding his booty. A master thief with these eight factors is
soon executed, and doesn't have long to live.

A master thief with eight factors is not soon executed, and lives long.
What eight? He doesn't attack unprovoked. He doesn't steal everything
without exception. He doesn't kill a woman. He doesn't rape a girl. He
doesn't rob a monk. He doesn't rob the royal treasury. He doesn't work
close to home. He's skilled at hiding his booty. A master thief with
these eight factors is not soon executed, and lives long."

</article>
<article id="an8.85">

#### [AN 8.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Terms for the Realized One ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"'Ascetic' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. 'Brahmin', 'Knowledge Master', 'Healer', 'Unstained',
'Immaculate', 'Knower', and 'Freed' are terms for the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

> The supreme should be attained by an ascetic,\
> a brahmin who has lived the life;\
> it should be attained by a knowledge master,\
> a healer.
>
> The supreme should be attained by the unstained,\
> stainless and pure;\
> it should be attained by a knower,\
> who is free.
>
> I am victorious in battle!\
> Released, I release others from their chains.\
> I am a dragon completely tamed,\
> an adept, I am quenched."

</article>
<article id="an8.86">

#### [AN 8.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nāgita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Yasasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village
of the Kosalan brahmins named Icchānaṅgala. He stayed in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' ... It's good to
see such perfected ones."

Then, when the night had passed, they took abundant fresh and cooked
foods and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood outside
the gates making a dreadful racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's attendant. Then the
Buddha said to Nāgita, "Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd
think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala. They've
brought abundant fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing outside
the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the mendicant
Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. There are
those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of
seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they
want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy the
filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

Even some of the deities can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. When you all
come together to enjoy each other's company, I think: 'These venerables
mustn't get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the
pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they want, without
trouble or difficulty like I can. That must be because they come
together to enjoy each other's company.'

Take mendicants I see poking each other with their fingers, giggling and
playing together. I think to myself: 'These venerables mustn't get the
pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of
peace, the pleasure of awakening when they want, without trouble or
difficulty like I can. That must be because they're poking each other
with their fingers, giggling and playing together.'

Take mendicants I see eat as much as they like until their bellies are
full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and
drowsing. I think to myself: 'These venerables mustn't get the pleasure
of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the
pleasure of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty like
I can. That must be because they eat as much as they like until their
bellies are full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing.'

Take a mendicant living within a village who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now a monastery worker, a novice, or a
fellow practitioner will make this venerable fall from immersion.' So
I'm not pleased that that mendicant is living within a village.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting nodding in
meditation. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable, having dispelled
that sleepiness and weariness, will focus just on the unified perception
of wilderness.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is living in the
wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting without being
immersed in samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now if this venerable's mind is
not immersed in samādhi they will immerse it; or if it is immersed in
samādhi, they will preserve it.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is
living in the wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable will free the unfreed
mind or preserve the freed mind.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is
living in the wilderness.

Take a mendicant who I see living within a village receiving robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Enjoying
possessions, honor, and popularity they neglect retreat, and they
neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. They come down
to villages, towns and capital cities and make their homes there. So I'm
not pleased that that mendicant is living within a village.

Take a mendicant who I see in the wilderness receiving robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Fending off
possessions, honor, and popularity they don't neglect retreat, and they
don't neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. So I'm
pleased that that mendicant is living in the wilderness.

Nāgita, when I'm walking along a road and I don't see anyone ahead or
behind I feel relaxed, even if I need to urinate or defecate."

</article>
<article id="an8.87">

#### [AN 8.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Turning the Bowl Upside Down ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pattanikujjanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upside down for
a lay follower on eight grounds. What eight? They try to prevent the
mendicants from getting material things. They try to harm mendicants.
They try to drive mendicants from a monastery. They insult and abuse
mendicants. They divide mendicants against each other. They criticize
the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. The Saṅgha may, if it wishes,
turn the bowl upside down for a lay follower on these eight grounds.

The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upright for a lay follower
on eight grounds. What eight? They don't try to prevent the mendicants
from getting material things. They don't try to harm mendicants. They
don't try to drive mendicants from a monastery. They don't insult and
abuse mendicants. They don't divide mendicants against each other. They
don't criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. The Saṅgha
may, if it wishes, turn the bowl upright for a lay follower on these
eight grounds."

</article>
<article id="an8.88">

#### [AN 8.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Proclamation of No Confidence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appasādapavedanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of
no confidence in a mendicant who has eight qualities. What eight? They
try to prevent the lay people from getting material things. They try to
harm lay people. They insult and abuse lay people. They divide lay
people against each other. They criticize the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha. They're seen at an inappropriate place for collecting alms.
The lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of no
confidence in a mendicant who has these eight qualities.

The lay followers may, if they wish, make a proclamation of confidence
in a mendicant who has eight qualities. What eight? They don't try to
prevent the lay people from getting material things. They don't try to
harm lay people. They don't insult and abuse lay people. They don't
divide lay people against each other. They don't criticize the Buddha,
the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They're not seen at an inappropriate place
for collecting alms. The lay followers may, if they wish, make a
proclamation of confidence in a mendicant who has these eight
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an8.89">

#### [AN 8.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reconciliation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭisāraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the Saṅgha may, if it wishes, perform an act requiring that
a mendicant who has eight qualities should pursue reconciliation. What
eight? They try to prevent the lay people from getting material things.
They try to harm lay people. They insult and abuse lay people. They
divide lay people against each other. They criticize the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha. They don't keep a legitimate promise made to a
lay person. The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, perform an act requiring that
a mendicant who has eight qualities should pursue reconciliation.

The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, revoke the act requiring that a mendicant
who has eight qualities should pursue reconciliation. What eight? They
don't try to prevent the lay people from getting material things. They
don't try to harm lay people. They don't insult and abuse lay people.
They don't divide lay people against each other. They don't criticize
the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They keep a legitimate promise
made to a lay person. The Saṅgha may, if it wishes, revoke the act
requiring that a mendicant who has eight qualities should pursue
reconciliation."

</article>
<article id="an8.90">

#### [AN 8.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Proper Behavior in a Case of Aggravated Misconduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammāvattanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has been convicted of aggravated misconduct
must behave themselves properly in eight respects. They must not perform
an ordination, give dependence, or be attended by a novice. They must
not consent to being appointed as adviser for nuns, and if they are
appointed they should not give such advice. They must not consent to any
Saṅgha appointment. They must not be put in a position of seniority.
They must not resolve others from any offense similar to that which they
have transgressed. A mendicant who has been convicted of aggravated
misconduct must behave themselves properly in these eight respects."

</article>

[]{#an8-samannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Similarity {#an8-samannavagga.xhtml_an8-samannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.91-117">

#### [AN 8.91--117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses With Various Laywomen on the Sabbath ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmaññavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then the lay woman Bojjhā ... Sirīmā ... Padumā ... Sutanā ...
Manujā ... Uttarā ... Muttā ... Khemā ... Somā ... Rucī ... Cundī ...
Bimbī ... Sumanā ... Mallikā ... Tissā ... Tissamātā ... Soṇā ... Soṇā's
mother ... Kāṇā ... Kāṇamātā ... Uttarā Nanda's mother ... Visākhā
Migāra's mother ... the lay woman Khujjuttarā ... the lay woman Sāmāvatī
... Suppavāsā the Koliyan ... the lay woman Suppiyā ... the housewife
Nakula's mother ...

</article>

[]{#an8-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an8-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an8-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an8.118">

#### [AN 8.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. What eight?
Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. For insight into
greed, these eight things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an8.119">

#### [AN 8.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. What eight?
Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both
pretty and ugly. ... Not perceiving form internally, they see forms
externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. ... Not perceiving form
internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly.
... Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. ... yellow ... red ... Not
perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, white, with white
color and white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an8.120">

#### [AN 8.120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. What eight?
Having physical form, they see forms ... not perceiving form internally,
they see forms externally ... they're focused only on beauty ... going
totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space
... going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness ... going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they enter
and remain in the dimension of nothingness ... going totally beyond the
dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception ... going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and
remain in the cessation of perception and feeling ... For insight into
greed, these eight things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an8.121-147">

#### [AN 8.121--147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ... these eight things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an8.148-627">

#### [AN 8.148--627]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... letting go of negligence these eight things should be
developed."

The Book of the Eights is finished.

</article>

[]{#an9.xhtml}

# The Book of the Nines {#an9.xhtml_an9 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an9-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an9-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an9-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Awakening {#an9-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an9-sambodhivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.1">

#### [AN 9.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Awakening ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sambodhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
what is the vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors?' How would you answer them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ... The mendicants will listen
and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
what is the vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors?' You should answer them:

'It's when a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This is the first vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
This is the second vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom,
freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. This is the third
vital condition for the development of the awakening factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the fourth vital condition for the
development of the awakening factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fifth vital condition for the
development of the awakening factors.'

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be ethical ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
live with energy roused up ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be wise ...

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should develop four
further things. They should develop the perception of ugliness to give
up greed, love to give up hate, mindfulness of breathing to cut off
thinking, and perception of impermanence to uproot the conceit 'I am'.
When you perceive impermanence, the perception of not-self becomes
stabilized. Perceiving not-self, you uproot the conceit 'I am' and
attain extinguishment in this very life."

</article>
<article id="an9.2">

#### [AN 9.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Supported ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of being 'supported'. How is a mendicant who is
supported defined?"

"Mendicant, if a mendicant supported by faith gives up the unskillful
and develops the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them.

If a mendicant supported by conscience ...

If a mendicant supported by prudence ...

If a mendicant supported by energy ...

If a mendicant supported by wisdom gives up the unskillful and develops
the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them. What's been
given up is completely given up when it has been given up by seeing with
noble wisdom.

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should rely on four
things. What four? After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things,
endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.
That's how a mendicant is supported."

</article>
<article id="an9.3">

#### [AN 9.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Meghiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Meghiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Cālikā, on the Cālikā mountain.

Now, at that time Venerable Meghiya was the Buddha's attendant. Then
Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, I'd like to enter Jantu village for alms."

"Please, Meghiya, go at your convenience."

Then Meghiya robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Jantu village for alms. After the meal, on his return from
almsround in Jantu village, he went to the shore of Kimikālā river. As
he was going for a walk along the shore of the river he saw a lovely and
delightful mango grove.

It occurred to him, "Oh, this mango grove is lovely and delightful! This
is good enough for striving for a gentleman wanting to strive. If the
Buddha allows me, I'll come back to this mango grove to meditate."

Then Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened, adding, "If the Buddha allows me,
I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"We're alone, Meghiya. Wait until another mendicant comes."

For a second time Meghiya said to the Buddha, "Sir, the Buddha has
nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. But I have. If
you allow me, I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"We're alone, Meghiya. Wait until another mendicant comes."

For a third time Meghiya said to the Buddha, "Sir, the Buddha has
nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. But I have. If
you allow me, I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"Meghiya, since you speak of striving in meditation, what can I say?
Please, Meghiya, go at your convenience."

Then Meghiya got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went to that mango grove, and,
having plunged deep into it, sat at the root of a certain tree for the
day's meditation. But while Meghiya was meditating in that mango grove
he was beset mostly by three kinds of bad, unskillful thoughts, namely,
sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts.

Then he thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! I've gone forth out
of faith from the lay life to homelessness, but I'm still harassed by
these three kinds of bad, unskillful thoughts: sensual, malicious, and
cruel thoughts."

Then Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Meghiya, when the heart's release is not ripe, five things help it
ripen. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates. This
is the first thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom,
freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. This is the third
thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fifth thing that, when the heart's
release is not ripe, helps it ripen.

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be ethical ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be energetic ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be wise ...

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should develop four
further things. They should develop the perception of ugliness to give
up greed, love to give up hate, mindfulness of breathing to cut off
thinking, and perception of impermanence to uproot the conceit 'I am'.
When you perceive impermanence, the perception of not-self becomes
stabilized. Perceiving not-self, you uproot the conceit 'I am' and
attain extinguishment in this very life."

</article>
<article id="an9.4">

#### [AN 9.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nandaka ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nandakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was educating, encouraging, firing
up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma
talk. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and
went to the assembly hall. He stood outside the door waiting for the
talk to end. When he knew the talk had ended he cleared his throat and
knocked on the door-panel. The mendicants opened the door for the
Buddha, and he entered the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out.

He said to Nandaka, "Nandaka, that was a long exposition of the teaching
you gave to the mendicants. My back was aching while I stood outside the
door waiting for the talk to end."

When he said this, Nandaka felt embarrassed and said to the Buddha,
"Sir, we didn't know that the Buddha was standing outside the door. If
we'd known, I wouldn't have said so much."

Then the Buddha, knowing that Nandaka was embarrassed, said to him,
"Good, good, Nandaka! It's appropriate for gentlemen like you, who have
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, to sit
together for a Dhamma talk. When you're sitting together you should do
one of two things: discuss the teachings or keep noble silence.

Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're incomplete
in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking, 'How can I become
faithful and ethical?' When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're
complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity
of heart. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it,
thinking, 'How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal
serenity of heart?' When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets
internal serenity of heart, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart,
but they don't get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. So
they're incomplete in that respect. Suppose, Nandaka, there was a
four-footed animal that was lame and disabled. It would be incomplete in
that respect. In the same way, a mendicant is faithful, ethical, and
gets internal serenity of heart, but they don't get the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles. So they're incomplete in that respect, and
should fulfill it, thinking, 'How can I become faithful and ethical and
get internal serenity of heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment
of principles?'

When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of
heart and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, they're
complete in that respect."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Nandaka said to the
mendicants, "Just now, reverends, the Buddha explained a spiritual
practice that's entirely full and pure in four statements, before
getting up from his seat and entering his dwelling:

'Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're incomplete
in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking, "How can I become
faithful and ethical?" When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're
complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity
of heart. ...

They get internal serenity of heart, but they don't get the higher
wisdom of discernment of principles. So they're incomplete in that
respect. Suppose, Nandaka, there was a four-footed animal that was lame
and disabled. It would be incomplete in that respect. In the same way, a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart, but
they don't get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. So
they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking:
"How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal serenity of
heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles?" When a
mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of heart
and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, they're
complete in that respect.'

Reverends, there are these five benefits of listening to the teachings
at the right time and discussing the teachings at the right time. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant proclaims a teaching to the mendicants that is good
in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful
and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure. Whenever they do this, they become liked and approved by
the Teacher, respected and admired. This is the first benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, they feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that
Dhamma. This is the second benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, they see the meaning of a deep saying in that Dhamma with
penetrating wisdom. This is the third benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, their spiritual companions esteem them more highly,
thinking, 'For sure this venerable has attained or will attain.' This is
the fourth benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, there may be trainee mendicants present, who haven't
achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. Hearing that teaching, they rouse energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. There may be perfected mendicants present, who have ended
the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the
fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through
enlightenment. Hearing that teaching, they simply live happily in the
present life. This is the fifth benefit ...

These are the five benefits of listening to the teachings at the right
time and discussing the teachings at the right time."

</article>
<article id="an9.5">

#### [AN 9.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Powers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Balasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness.

And what is the power of wisdom? One has clearly seen and clearly
contemplated with wisdom those qualities that are skillful and
considered to be skillful; those that are unskillful ... blameworthy ...
blameless ... dark ... bright ... to be cultivated ... not to be
cultivated ... not worthy of the noble ones ... worthy of the noble ones
and considered to be worthy of the noble ones. This is called the power
of wisdom.

And what is the power of energy? One generates enthusiasm, tries, makes
an effort, exerts the mind, and strives to give up those qualities that
are unskillful and considered to be unskillful; those that are
blameworthy ... dark ... not to be cultivated ... not worthy of the
noble ones and considered to be not worthy of the noble ones. One
generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and
strives to gain those qualities that are skillful and considered to be
skillful; those that are blameless ... bright ... to be cultivated ...
worthy of the noble ones and considered to be worthy of the noble ones.
This is called the power of energy.

And what is the power of blamelessness? It's when a noble disciple has
blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is called the
power of blamelessness.

And what is the power of inclusiveness? There are these four ways of
being inclusive. Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. The
best of gifts is the gift of the teaching. The best sort of kindly
speech is to teach the Dhamma again and again to someone who is engaged
and who actively listens. The best way of taking care is to encourage,
settle, and ground the unfaithful in faith, the unethical in ethics, the
stingy in generosity, and the ignorant in wisdom. The best kind of
equality is the equality of a stream-enterer with another
stream-enterer, a once-returner with another once-returner, a
non-returner with another non-returner, and a perfected one with another
perfected one. This is called the power of inclusiveness. These are the
four powers.

A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past five fears. What
five? Fear regarding livelihood, disrepute, feeling insecure in an
assembly, death, and bad rebirth.

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'I have no fear regarding livelihood.
Why would I be afraid of that? I have these four powers: the powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. A witless person might
fear for their livelihood. A lazy person might fear for their
livelihood. A person who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech,
and mind might fear for their livelihood. A person who does not include
others might fear for their livelihood. I have no fear of disrepute ...
I have no fear about feeling insecure in an assembly ... I have no fear
of death ... I have no fear of a bad rebirth. Why would I be afraid of
that? I have these four powers: the powers of wisdom, energy,
blamelessness, and inclusiveness. A witless person might be afraid of a
bad rebirth. A lazy person might be afraid of a bad rebirth. A person
who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech, and mind might be
afraid of a bad rebirth. A person who does not include others might be
afraid of a bad rebirth.'

A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past these five
fears."

</article>
<article id="an9.6">

#### [AN 9.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Association ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sevanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, you should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should
associate with, and those you shouldn't associate with. You should
distinguish two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and those you
shouldn't wear. You should distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which
you should eat, and that which you shouldn't eat. You should distinguish
two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent, and those you shouldn't
frequent. You should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you
should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent. You should
distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent, and those
you shouldn't frequent.

You should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should associate
with, and those you shouldn't associate with.' That's what I said, but
why did I say it? Well, should you know of a person: 'When I associate
with this person, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities
decline. And the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are hard
to come by. And the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from
the lay life to homelessness is not being fully developed.' In this case
you should leave that person at that very time of the day or night,
without asking. You shouldn't follow them.

Whereas, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this
person, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline. But
the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
However, the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the
lay life to homelessness is not being fully developed.' In this case you
should leave that person after reflecting, without asking. You shouldn't
follow them.

Well, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this person,
unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow. And the
necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are hard to come by.
But the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the lay
life to homelessness is being fully developed.' In this case you should
follow that person after appraisal. You shouldn't leave them.

Whereas, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this
person, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow. And
the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
And the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the lay
life to homelessness is being fully developed.' In this case you should
follow that person. You shouldn't leave them, even if they send you
away. 'You should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should
associate with, and those you shouldn't associate with.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Well, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this robe, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not wear
that kind of robe. Whereas, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this
robe, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You
should wear that kind of robe. 'You should distinguish two kinds of
robes: those you should wear, and those you shouldn't wear.' That's what
I said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which you should
eat, and that which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, but why did
I say it? Well, should you know of almsfood: 'When I eat this almsfood,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not eat that kind of almsfood. Whereas, should you know of almsfood:
'When I eat this almsfood, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should eat that kind of almsfood. 'You should
distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat, and that
which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of lodging. Whereas, should you know of a
lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of lodging.
'You should distinguish two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? Well, should you know of a village or town: 'When I
frequent this village or town, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful
qualities decline.' You should not frequent that kind of village or
town. Whereas, should you know of a village or town: 'When I frequent
this village or town, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of village or town. 'You
should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a country: 'When I frequent this country,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of country. Whereas, should you know of a
country: 'When I frequent this country, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of country.
'You should distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it."

</article>
<article id="an9.7">

#### [AN 9.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sutavā the Wanderer ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sutavāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain. Then the wanderer Sutavā went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this one time the Buddha was staying right here in Rājagaha, the
Mountainfold. There I heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't
transgress in five respects. A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they did as a lay person.' I trust I
properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and remembered that from the
Buddha?"

"Indeed, Sutavā, you properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and
remembered that. In the past, as today, I say this: 'A mendicant who is
perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is
rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress in nine respects.
A mendicant with defilements ended can't deliberately take the life of a
living creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex,
tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like
they did as a lay person. And they can't make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice.' In the past, as today,
I say this: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who
has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down
the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't
transgress in these nine respects.'"

</article>
<article id="an9.8">

#### [AN 9.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Wanderer Sajjha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sajjhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain. Then the wanderer Sajjha went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this one time the Buddha was staying right here in Rājagaha, the
Mountainfold. There I heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't
transgress in five respects. A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they did as a lay person.' I trust I
properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and remembered that from the
Buddha?"

"Indeed, Sajjha, you properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and
remembered that. In the past, as today, I say this: 'A mendicant who is
perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is
rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress in nine respects.
A mendicant with defilements ended can't deliberately kill a living
creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a
deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they used
to as a lay person. And they can't abandon the Buddha, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, or the training.' In the past, as today, I say this: 'A
mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress
in these nine respects.'"

</article>
<article id="an9.9">

#### [AN 9.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puggalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these nine people are found in the world. What nine? The
perfected one and the one practicing for perfection. The non-returner
and the one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The
once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of stream-entry. And the ordinary person. These are the nine
people found in the world."

</article>
<article id="an9.10">

#### [AN 9.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these nine people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What nine? The perfected one and the one practicing for
perfection. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit
of non-return. The once-returner and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of once-return. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. And a lamb of the flock. These are
the nine people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

</article>

[]{#an9-sihanadavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Lion's Roar {#an9-sihanadavagga.xhtml_an9-sihanadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.11">

#### [AN 9.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sāriputta's Lion's Roar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, I have completed the rainy season residence
at Sāvatthī. I wish to depart to wander the countryside."

"Please, Sāriputta, go at your convenience." Then Sāriputta got up from
his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his
right, before leaving.

And then, not long after Sāriputta had left, a certain monk said to the
Buddha, "Sir, Venerable Sāriputta attacked me and left without saying
sorry."

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
Sāriputta that the teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Sāriputta and said to him,
"Reverend Sāriputta, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied.

Now at that time the Venerables Mahāmoggallāna and Ānanda, taking a
latchkey, went from dwelling to dwelling, saying: "Come forth,
venerables! Come forth, venerables! Now Venerable Sāriputta will roar
his lion's roar in the presence of the Buddha!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Sāriputta, one of your spiritual companions has made this complaint:
'Venerable Sāriputta attacked me and left without saying sorry.'"

"Sir, someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well
attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose they were to toss both clean and unclean things on the earth,
like feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The earth isn't horrified,
repelled, and disgusted because of this. In the same way, I live with a
heart like the earth, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might
well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying
sorry.

Suppose they were to wash both clean and unclean things in water, like
feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The water isn't horrified, repelled,
and disgusted because of this. In the same way, I live with a heart like
water, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well
attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose a fire were to burn both clean and unclean things, like feces,
urine, spit, pus, and blood. The fire isn't horrified, repelled, and
disgusted because of this. In the same way, I live with a heart like
fire, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well
attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose the wind was to blow on both clean and unclean things, like
feces, urine, spit, pus, and blood. The wind isn't horrified, repelled,
and disgusted because of this. In the same way, I live with a heart like
the wind, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well
attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose a rag was to wipe up both clean and unclean things, like feces,
urine, spit, pus, and blood. The rag isn't horrified, repelled, and
disgusted because of this. In the same way, I live with a heart like a
rag, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might well
attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose a boy or girl of a corpse-worker tribe, holding a pot and clad
in rags, were to enter a town or village. They'd enter with a humble
mind. In the same way, I live with a heart like a boy or girl of a
corpse-worker tribe, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. Someone who had not established mindfulness of the body might
well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave without saying
sorry.

Suppose there was a bull with his horns cut, gentle, well tamed and well
trained. He'd wander from street to street and square to square without
hurting anyone with his feet or horns. In the same way, I live with a
heart like a bull with horns cut, abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will. Someone who had not established mindfulness of
the body might well attack one of their spiritual companions and leave
without saying sorry.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and had bathed their head. If the carcass of a snake or a
dog or a human were hung around their neck, they'd be horrified,
repelled, and disgusted. In the same way, I'm horrified, repelled, and
disgusted by this rotten body. Someone who had not established
mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their spiritual
companions and leave without saying sorry.

Suppose someone was to carry around a bowl of fat that was leaking and
oozing from holes and cracks. In the same way, I carry around this body
that's leaking and oozing from holes and cracks. Someone who had not
established mindfulness of the body might well attack one of their
spiritual companions and leave without saying sorry."

Then that monk rose from his seat, placed his robe over one shoulder,
bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet, and said, "I have made a
mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to speak ill
of Venerable Sāriputta with an incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful
claim. Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain
myself in future."

"Indeed, monk, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to act in that way. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta, "Sāriputta, forgive that
futile man before his head explodes into seven pieces right here."

"I will pardon that venerable if he asks me: 'May the venerable please
pardon me too.'"

</article>
<article id="an9.12">

#### [AN 9.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Residue ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saupādisesasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl
and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too
early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why don't I visit the monastery of
the wanderers of other religions?" Then he went to the monastery of the
wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers
there. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down
to one side.

Now at that time while those wanderers of other religions were sitting
together this discussion came up among them:

"Reverends, no-one who dies with residue is exempt from hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm. They're not exempt from places of loss, bad
places, the underworld."

Sāriputta neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the wanderers
of other religions. He got up from his seat, thinking, "I will learn the
meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then Sāriputta wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his
return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Sāriputta, these foolish, incompetent wanderers following other
religions: who are they to know whether someone has residue or not?

There are these nine people who, dying with residue, are exempt from
hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're exempt from places
of loss, bad places, the underworld. What nine?

There's a person who has fulfilled ethics and immersion, but has limited
wisdom. With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished
between one life and the next. This is the first person ...

Furthermore, there's a person who has fulfilled ethics and immersion,
but has limited wisdom. With the ending of the five lower fetters
they're extinguished upon landing. This is the second person ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. This is the third person ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. This is the fourth person ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. This is the fifth person ...

Furthermore, there's a person who has fulfilled ethics, but has limited
immersion and wisdom. With the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they're a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. This
is the sixth person ...

Furthermore, there's a person who has fulfilled ethics, but has limited
immersion and wisdom. With the ending of three fetters, they're a
one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then
make an end of suffering. This is the seventh person ...

Furthermore, there's a person who has fulfilled ethics, but has limited
immersion and wisdom. With the ending of three fetters, they go from
family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families
and then make an end of suffering. This is the eighth person ...

Furthermore, there's a person who has fulfilled ethics, but has limited
immersion and wisdom. With the ending of three fetters, they have at
most seven rebirths. They will transmigrate at most seven times among
gods and humans and then make an end of suffering. This is the ninth
person ...

These foolish, incompetent wanderers following other religions: who are
they to know whether someone has residue or not? These are the nine
people who, dying with residue, are exempt from hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. They're exempt from places of loss, bad places, the
underworld.

Up until now, Sāriputta, I have not felt the need to give this
exposition of the teaching to the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Why
is that? For I didn't want those who heard it to introduce negligence.
However, I have spoken it in order to answer your question."

</article>
<article id="an9.13">

#### [AN 9.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Koṭṭhita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Koṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for
this purpose: 'May deeds to be experienced in this life be experienced
by me in lives to come'?"

"Certainly not, reverend."

"Then is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose:
'May deeds to be experienced in lives to come be experienced by me in
this life'?"

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose: 'May
deeds to be experienced as pleasant be experienced by me as painful'?"

"Certainly not."

"Then is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose:
'May deeds to be experienced as painful be experienced by me as
pleasant'?"

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose: 'May
deeds to be experienced when ripe be experienced by me when unripe'?"

"Certainly not."

"Then is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose:
'May deeds to be experienced when unripe be experienced by me when
ripe'?"

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose: 'May
deeds to be experienced a lot be experienced by me a little'?"

"Certainly not."

"Then is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose:
'May deeds to be experienced a little be experienced by me a lot'?"

"Certainly not."

"Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose: 'May
deeds to be experienced by me be not experienced'?"

"Certainly not."

"Then is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for this purpose:
'May deeds not to be experienced be experienced'?"

"Certainly not."

"Reverend Sāriputta, when you were asked whether the spiritual life was
lived under the Buddha so that deeds to be experienced in this life are
experienced in lives to come, you said, 'Certainly not'.

When you were asked whether the spiritual life was lived under the
Buddha so that deeds to be experienced in lives to come are experienced
in this life ...

deeds to be experienced as pleasant are experienced as painful ...

deeds to be experienced as painful are experienced as pleasant ...

deeds to be experienced when ripe are experienced when unripe ...

deeds to be experienced when unripe are experienced when ripe ...

deeds to be experienced a lot are experienced a little ...

deeds to be experienced a little are experienced a lot ...

deeds to be experienced are not experienced ...

When you were asked whether the spiritual life was lived under the
Buddha so that deeds not to be experienced are experienced, you said,
'Certainly not.' Then what exactly is the purpose of leading the
spiritual life under the Buddha?"

"Reverend, the spiritual life is lived under the Buddha to know, see,
attain, realize, and comprehend that which is unknown, unseen,
unattained, unrealized, and uncomprehended."

"But what is the unknown, unseen, unattained, unrealized, and
uncomprehended?"

"'This is suffering.' ... 'This is the origin of suffering.' ... 'This
is the cessation of suffering.' ... 'This is the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.' ... This is the unknown, unseen,
unattained, unrealized, and uncomprehended. The spiritual life is lived
under the Buddha to know, see, attain, realize, and comprehend this."

</article>
<article id="an9.14">

#### [AN 9.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Samiddhi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samiddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Samiddhi went up to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, and sat
to one side. Venerable Sāriputta said to him:

"Samiddhi, based on what do thoughts arise in a person?"

"Based on name and form, sir."

"Where do they become diversified?"

"In the elements."

"What is their origin?"

"Contact is their origin."

"What is their meeting place?"

"Feeling is their meeting place."

"What is their chief?"

"Immersion is their chief."

"What is their ruler?"

"Mindfulness is their ruler."

"What is their overseer?"

"Wisdom is their overseer."

"What is their core?"

"Freedom is their core."

"What is their culmination?"

"They culminate in freedom from death."

"Samiddhi, when you were asked what is the basis on which thoughts arise
in a person, you answered 'name and form'. When you were asked ... what
is their culmination, you answered 'freedom from death'. Good, good,
Samiddhi! It's good that you answered each question. But don't get
conceited because of that."

</article>
<article id="an9.15">

#### [AN 9.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Boil ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gaṇḍasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, suppose there was a boil that was many years old. And that
boil had nine orifices that were continually open wounds. Whatever oozed
out of them would be filthy, stinking, and disgusting. Whatever leaked
out them would be filthy, stinking, and disgusting.

'Boil' is a term for this body made up of the four principal states,
produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable
to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and
destruction. And that boil has nine orifices that are continually open
wounds. Whatever oozes out of them is filthy, stinking, and disgusting.
Whatever leaks out of them is filthy, stinking, and disgusting. So,
mendicants, have no illusion about this body."

</article>
<article id="an9.16">

#### [AN 9.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these nine perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What nine? The perceptions of ugliness,
death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world,
impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self in suffering, giving
up, and fading away. These nine perceptions, when developed and
cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom
from death and end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an9.17">

#### [AN 9.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Families ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kulasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, visiting a family with nine factors is not worthwhile, or
if you've already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile. What nine?
They don't politely rise, bow, or offer a seat. They hide what they
have. Even when they have much they give little. Even when they have
refined things they give coarse things. They give carelessly, not
carefully. They don't sit nearby to listen to the teachings. When you're
speaking, they don't listen well. Visiting a family with these nine
factors is not worthwhile, or if you've already arrived, sitting down is
not worthwhile.

Visiting a family with nine factors is worthwhile, or if you've already
arrived, sitting down is worthwhile. What nine? They politely rise, bow,
and offer a seat. They don't hide what they have. When they have much
they give much. When they have refined things they give refined things.
They give carefully, not carelessly. They sit nearby to listen to the
teachings. When you're speaking, they listen well. Visiting a family
with these nine factors is worthwhile, or if you've already arrived,
sitting down is worthwhile."

</article>
<article id="an9.18">

#### [AN 9.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Sabbath with Nine Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Navaṅguposathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the observance of the sabbath with its nine factors is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful. And how should it be
observed?

It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the
perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and
the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for
all living beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing
living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous
and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'
This is its first factor. ...

'As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I,
too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll
sleep in a low place, either a small bed or a straw mat. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.' This is
its eighth factor.

They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love
to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and
ill will. This is its ninth factor.

The observance of the sabbath with its nine factors in this way is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful."

</article>
<article id="an9.19">

#### [AN 9.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Deity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devatāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, tonight, several glorious deities, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, came to me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me:
'Sir, formerly when we were human beings, renunciates came to our homes.
We politely rose for them, but we didn't bow. And so, having not
fulfilled our duty, full of remorse and regret, we were reborn in a
lesser realm.'

Then several other deities came to me and said: 'Sir, formerly when we
were human beings, renunciates came to our homes. We politely rose for
them and bowed, but we didn't offer a seat. And so, having not fulfilled
our duty, full of remorse and regret, we were reborn in a lesser realm.'

Then several other deities came to me and said: 'Sir, formerly when we
were human beings, renunciates came to our homes. We politely rose for
them, bowed, and offered a seat, but we didn't share as best we could.
...'

'... we didn't sit nearby to listen to the teachings. ...'

'... we didn't actively listen to the teachings. ...'

'... we didn't memorize the teachings. ...'

'... we didn't examine the meaning of teachings we'd memorized. ...'

'... not having understood the meaning and the teaching, we didn't
practice accordingly. And so, having not fulfilled our duty, full of
remorse and regret, we were reborn in a lesser realm.'

Then several other deities came to me and said: 'Sir, formerly when we
were human beings, renunciates came to our homes. We politely rose,
bowed, and offered them a seat. We shared as best we could. We sat
nearby to listen to the teachings, lent an ear, memorized them, and
examined their meaning. Understanding the teaching and the meaning we
practiced accordingly. And so, having fulfilled our duty, free of
remorse and regret, we were reborn in a superior realm.'

Here, mendicants, are these roots of trees, and here are these empty
huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be negligent! Don't regret
it later, like those former deities."

</article>
<article id="an9.20">

#### [AN 9.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Velāma ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Velāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Householder, I wonder whether your family gives gifts?"

"It does, sir. But only coarse gruel with pickles."

"Householder, someone might give a gift that's either solid or subtle.
But they give it carelessly, thoughtlessly, not with their own hand.
They give the dregs, and they give without consideration for
consequences. Then wherever the result of any such gift manifests, their
mind doesn't incline toward enjoyment of nice food, clothes, vehicles,
or the five refined kinds of sensual stimulation. And their children,
wives, bondservants, servants, and workers don't want to listen to them.
They don't actively listen or try to understand. Why is that? Because
that is the result of deeds done carelessly.

Someone might give a gift that's either solid or subtle. And they give
it carefully, thoughtfully, with their own hand. They don't give the
dregs, and they give with consideration for consequences. Then wherever
the result of any such gift manifests, their mind inclines toward
enjoyment of nice food, clothes, vehicles, or the five refined kinds of
sensual stimulation. And their children, wives, bondservants, servants,
and workers want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand.
Why is that? Because that is the result of deeds done carefully.

Once upon a time, householder, there was a brahmin named Velāma. He gave
the following gift, a great offering. 84,000 gold pots filled with
silver. 84,000 silver pots filled with gold. 84,000 bronze pots filled
with gold coins. 84,000 elephants with gold adornments and banners,
covered with snow gold netting. 84,000 chariots upholstered with the
hide of lions, tigers, and leopards, and cream rugs, with gold
adornments and banners, covered with gold netting. 84,000 milk cows with
silken reins and bronze pails. 84,000 maidens bedecked with jeweled
earrings. 84,000 couches spread with woolen covers---shag-piled, pure
white, or embroidered with flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide,
with canopies above and red pillows at both ends. 8,400,000,000 fine
cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. And who can say how much food,
drink, snacks, meals, refreshments, and beverages? It seemed like an
overflowing river.

Householder, you might think: 'Surely the brahmin Velāma must have been
someone else at that time?' But you should not see it like this. I
myself was the brahmin Velāma at that time. I gave that gift, a great
offering. But at that event there was no-one worthy of a religious
donation, and no-one to purify the religious donation.

It would be more fruitful to feed one person accomplished in view than
that great offering of Velāma.

It would be more fruitful to feed one once-returner than a hundred
persons accomplished in view.

It would be more fruitful to feed one non-returner than a hundred
once-returners.

It would be more fruitful to feed one perfected one than a hundred
non-returners.

It would be more fruitful to feed one Independent Buddha than a hundred
perfected ones.

It would be more fruitful to feed one Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha than a hundred Independent Buddhas.

It would be more fruitful to feed the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the
Buddha than to feed one Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha.

It would be more fruitful to build a dwelling especially for the Saṅgha
of the four quarters than to feed the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the
Buddha.

It would be more fruitful to go for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching,
and the Saṅgha with a confident heart than to build a dwelling for the
Saṅgha of the four quarters.

It would be more fruitful to undertake the training rules---not to kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or take
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence---than to go for refuge to the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha with a confident heart.

It would be more fruitful to develop a heart of love---even just as long
as it takes to pull a cow's udder---than to undertake the training
rules.

It would be more fruitful to develop the perception of
impermanence---even for as long as a finger-snap---than to do all of
these things, including developing a heart of love for as long as it
takes to pull a cow's udder."

</article>

[]{#an9-sattavasavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Abodes of Sentient Beings {#an9-sattavasavagga.xhtml_an9-sattavasavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.21">

#### [AN 9.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In Three Particulars ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tiṭhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the gods of the thirty-three and the
humans of the Black Plum Tree Land in three particulars. What three?
They're selfless and not possessive. They have a fixed life span. They
have a distinctive nature. The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the gods of
the thirty-three and the humans of the Black Plum Tree Land in these
three particulars.

The gods of the thirty-three surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the
Black Plum Tree Land in three particulars. What three? Heavenly life
span, beauty, and happiness. The gods of the thirty-three surpass the
humans of Uttarakuru and the Black Plum Tree Land in these three
particulars.

The humans of the Black Plum Tree Land surpass the humans of Uttarakuru
and the gods of the thirty-three in three particulars. What three?
Bravery, mindfulness, and the spiritual life is lived here. The humans
of the Black Plum Tree Land surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the
gods of the thirty-three in these three particulars."

</article>
<article id="an9.22">

#### [AN 9.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Wild Colt ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Assakhaḷuṅkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild
people; three excellent horses and three excellent people; and three
fine thoroughbred horses and three fine thoroughbred people. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak.

And what are the three wild colts? One wild colt is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild colt is fast and beautiful,
but not well proportioned. While another wild colt is fast, beautiful,
and well proportioned. These are the three wild colts.

And what are the three wild people? One wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another wild person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. But when asked a question about the teaching or
training, they falter without answering. This is how they're not
beautiful, I say. And they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well
proportioned, I say. This is how a wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned?
They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how they're
fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or training, they
answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. But they
don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how
a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? They
truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how they're
fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or training, they
answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. They
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say. This is how a wild
person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three
wild people.

And what are the three excellent horses? One excellent horse ... is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three excellent
horses.

What are the three excellent people? One excellent person ... is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer
without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. They receive
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This
is how they're well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three excellent
people.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred horses? One fine thoroughbred
horse ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three
fine thoroughbred horses.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? One fine thoroughbred
person ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a fine thoroughbred person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's a mendicant who realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the
teaching or training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're
beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned. These are the three fine thoroughbred people."

</article>
<article id="an9.23">

#### [AN 9.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rooted in Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāmūlakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about nine things rooted in craving. And
what are the nine things rooted in craving? Craving is a cause of
seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material things. Gaining material
things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is a cause of desire and
lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment. Attachment is a cause of
ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess. Stinginess is a cause of
safeguarding. Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to
be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and fights,
accusations, divisive speech, and lies. These are the nine things rooted
in craving."

</article>
<article id="an9.24">

#### [AN 9.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Abodes of Sentient Beings ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattāvāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are nine abodes of sentient beings. What nine?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in Brahmā's Host through the first
absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.

These are the nine abodes of sentient beings."

</article>
<article id="an9.25">

#### [AN 9.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Consolidated by Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant's mind has been well consolidated with
wisdom it's appropriate for them to say: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."'

And how is a mendicant's mind well consolidated with wisdom? The mind is
well consolidated with wisdom when they know: 'My mind is without
greed.' ... 'My mind is without hate.' ... 'My mind is without
delusion.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become greedy.' ... 'My mind is
not liable to become hateful.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become
deluded.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the sensual
realm.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the realm of
luminous form.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the
formless realm.' When a mendicant's mind has been well consolidated with
wisdom it's appropriate for them to say: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."'"

</article>
<article id="an9.26">

#### [AN 9.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Stone Pillar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Silāyūpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in
the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

There Venerable Candikāputta addressed the mendicants, "Reverends,
Devadatta teaches the mendicants like this: 'When a mendicant's mind is
solidified by heart, it's appropriate for them to say: "I understand:
'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to
be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.'"'"

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him, "Reverend
Candikāputta, Devadatta does not teach the mendicants like that. He
teaches like this: 'When a mendicant's mind is well consolidated by
heart, it's appropriate for them to say: "I understand: 'Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place.'"'"

For a second time ...

And for a third time Venerable Candikāputta addressed the mendicants ...

And for a third time, Sāriputta said to him, "Reverend Candikāputta,
Devadatta does not teach the mendicants like that. He teaches like this:
'When a mendicant's mind is well consolidated by heart, it's appropriate
for them to say: "I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.'"'

And how is a mendicant's mind well consolidated by heart? The mind is
well consolidated by heart when they know: 'My mind is without greed.'
... 'My mind is without hate.' ... 'My mind is without delusion.' ...
'My mind is not liable to become greedy.' ... 'My mind is not liable to
become hateful.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become deluded.' ... 'My
mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the sensual realm.' ... 'My
mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the realm of luminous form.'
... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the formless realm.'

When a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if compelling
sights come into the range of vision they don't occupy their mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance.

Suppose there was a stone pillar, sixteen feet long. Eight feet were
buried underground, and eight above ground. And violent storms were to
blow up out of the east, the west, the north, and the south. They
couldn't make it tremor and tremble and quake. Why is that? It's because
that stone pillar is firmly embedded, with deep foundations. In the same
way, when a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if
compelling sights come into the range of vision they don't occupy their
mind. The mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance.

If even compelling sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... and
ideas come into the range of the mind they don't occupy the mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance."

</article>
<article id="an9.27">

#### [AN 9.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dangers and Threats (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaverasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and
threats, and has the four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they
wish, declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in the present
life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.
Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and
threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't
experience mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled
for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ...

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ...

Anyone who lies ...

Anyone who uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates dangers
and threats both in the present life and in lives to come, and
experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from using
alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates no dangers and threats
either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience
mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone
who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence.

These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.'

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.'

And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones,
unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. These are the
four factors of stream-entry that they have.

When a noble disciple has quelled these five dangers and threats, and
has these four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish, declare
of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places,
the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

</article>
<article id="an9.28">

#### [AN 9.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dangers and Threats (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaverasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats,
and has the four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in the present
life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.
Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and
threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't
experience mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled
for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ... commits sexual misconduct ... lies ... Anyone who
uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates dangers and threats
both in the present life and in lives to come, and experiences mental
pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that
cause negligence creates no dangers and threats either in the present
life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental pain and
sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains
from using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are the five
dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? When a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
the Saṅgha ... And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the
noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.
These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have.

When a noble disciple has quelled these five dangers and threats, and
has these four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish, declare
of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places,
the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

</article>
<article id="an9.29">

#### [AN 9.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grounds for Resentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āghātavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are nine grounds for resentment. What nine? Thinking:
'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing
wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong to
someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong to someone I love' ... 'They
will do wrong to someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ...
'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help
someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment. These are the nine grounds
for resentment."

</article>
<article id="an9.30">

#### [AN 9.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Getting Rid of Resentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āghātapaṭivinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these nine methods to get rid of resentment. What
nine? Thinking: 'They harmed me, but what can I possibly do?' you get
rid of resentment. Thinking: 'They are harming me ...' ... 'They will
harm me ...' ... 'They harmed someone I love ...' ... 'They are harming
someone I love ...' 'They will harm someone I love ...' ... 'They helped
someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ...
Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. These are the nine methods to get rid of
resentment."

</article>
<article id="an9.31">

#### [AN 9.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Progressive Cessations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupubbanirodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these nine progressive cessations. What nine?

For someone who has attained the first absorption, sensual perceptions
have ceased.

For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected have ceased.

For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased.

For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has
ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the
perception of form has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness,
the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has
ceased.

For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling,
perception and feeling have ceased.

These are the nine progressive cessations."

</article>

[]{#an9-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an9-mahavagga.xhtml_an9-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.32">

#### [AN 9.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Progressive Meditations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupubbavihārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these nine progressive meditations. What nine?
The first absorption, the second absorption, the third absorption, the
fourth absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, and the cessation of perception
and feeling. These are the nine progressive meditations."

</article>
<article id="an9.33">

#### [AN 9.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Nine Progressive Meditative Attainments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupubbavihārasamāpattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the nine progressive meditative
attainments ... And what are the nine progressive meditative
attainments?

Where sensual pleasures cease, and those who have thoroughly ended
sensual pleasures meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where sensual pleasures
cease', they should be told: 'Reverend, it's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. That's where sensual pleasures cease.' Clearly someone who is
not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the placing of the mind and keeping it connected cease, and those
who have thoroughly ended the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless,
quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone
should say, 'I do not know or see where the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected cease', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's where the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected cease.' Clearly someone who
is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where rapture ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended rapture
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where rapture ceases', they should be told: 'It's
when a mendicant, with the fading away of rapture, enters and remains in
the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and
aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss". That's where
rapture ceases.' Clearly someone who is not devious or deceitful would
approve and agree with that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and bowing
down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where bliss with equanimity ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended
bliss with equanimity meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where bliss with equanimity
ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, giving up pleasure
and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. That's where bliss with equanimity ceases.' Clearly
someone who is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with
that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage
with joined palms.

Where perceptions of form ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended
perceptions of form meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where perceptions of form
ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, going totally
beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that "space
is infinite", enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space.
That's where perceptions of form cease.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of infinite space ceases, and
those who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of
infinite space meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where the perception of the
dimension of infinite space ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that "consciousness is infinite", enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. That's where the perception of the dimension of
infinite space ceases.' Clearly someone who is not devious or deceitful
would approve and agree with that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and
bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness ceases,
and those who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of
infinite consciousness meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness ceases', they should be told: 'It's
when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. That's where the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness ceases.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of nothingness ceases, and those
who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of nothingness
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where the perception of the dimension of
nothingness ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, going
totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, enters and remains in the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. That's where the
perception of the dimension of nothingness ceases.' Clearly someone who
is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended the
perception of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where the perception of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and
feeling. That's where the perception of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception ceases.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

These are the nine progressive meditative attainments."

</article>
<article id="an9.34">

#### [AN 9.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment is Bliss ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānasukhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo
Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

There he addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, extinguishment is bliss!
Extinguishment is bliss!"

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "But Reverend Sāriputta,
what's blissful about it, since nothing is felt?"

"The fact that nothing is felt is precisely what's blissful about it.

Reverend, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five?
Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The
pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual
stimulation is called sensual pleasure.

First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
sensual pleasures beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a
happy person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for
them. In the same way, should perception and focus accompanied by
sensual pleasures beset them, that's an affliction for them. And
affliction has been called suffering by the Buddha. That's the way to
understand how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if
perception and focus accompanied by placing of the mind beset them,
that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, should
perception and focus accompanied by placing of the mind beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture,
enters and remains in the third absorption. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
rapture beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy
person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In
the same way, should perception and focus accompanied by rapture beset
them, that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called
suffering by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how
extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth
absorption. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if
perception and focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset them,
that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, should
perception and focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
form beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person
were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the
same way, should perception and focus accompanied by form beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by the
dimension of infinite space beset them, that's an affliction for them.
Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, should perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite space beset them, that's an
affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering by the
Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and
remains in the dimension of nothingness. While a mendicant is practicing
such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by the dimension
of infinite consciousness beset them, that's an affliction for them.
Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, should perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite consciousness beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation,
if perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of nothingness
beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were
to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same
way, should perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of
nothingness beset them, that's an affliction for them. And affliction
has been called suffering by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand
how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end.

That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is bliss."

</article>
<article id="an9.35">

#### [AN 9.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Cow ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gāvīupamāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, suppose there was a mountain cow who was foolish,
incompetent, unskillful, and lacked common sense when roaming on rugged
mountains. She might think, 'Why don't I go somewhere I've never been
before? I could eat grass and drink water that I've never tried before.'
She'd take a step with a fore-hoof; but before it was properly set down,
she'd lift up a hind-hoof. She wouldn't go somewhere she'd never been
before, or eat grass and drink water that she'd never tried before. And
she'd never return safely to the place she had started from. Why is
that? Because that mountain cow was foolish, incompetent, unskillful,
and lacked common sense when roaming on rugged mountains.

In the same way, some foolish, incompetent, unskillful mendicant,
lacking common sense, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. But they don't cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis; they don't ensure it is properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enter and remain in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' But
they're not able to enter and remain in the second absorption. They
think, 'Why don't I, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.' But they're not able to enter and remain
in the first absorption. This is called a mendicant who has slipped and
fallen from both sides. They're like the mountain cow who was foolish,
incompetent, unskillful, and lacking in common sense when roaming on
rugged mountains.

Suppose there was a mountain cow who was astute, competent, skillful,
and used common sense when roaming on rugged mountains. She might think,
'Why don't I go somewhere I've never been before? I could eat grass and
drink water that I've never tried before.' She'd take a step with a
fore-hoof; and after it was properly set down, she'd lift up a
hind-hoof. She'd go somewhere she'd never been before, and eat grass and
drink water that she'd never tried before. And she'd return safely to
the place she had started from. Why is that? Because that mountain cow
was astute, competent, skillful, and used common sense when roaming on
rugged mountains. In the same way, some astute, competent, skillful
mendicant, using common sense, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. They cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enter and remain in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' Without
charging at the second absorption, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second
absorption. They cultivate, develop, and make much of that basis,
ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, with the fading away of rapture, enter and
remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss."' Without
charging at the third absorption, with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption. They cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and
the ending of former happiness and sadness, enter and remain in the
fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.' Without charging at the fourth absorption, with the giving
up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness,
they enter and remain in the fourth absorption. They cultivate, develop,
and make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that "space is infinite", enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite space.' Without charging at the dimension of
infinite space, with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain
in the dimension of infinite space. They cultivate, develop, and make
much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite consciousness.' Without charging at the dimension
of infinite consciousness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. They cultivate, develop, and make much of that
basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enter and remain in
the dimension of nothingness.' Without charging at the dimension of
nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. They
cultivate, develop, and make much of that basis, ensuring that it's
properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Without charging at the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. They cultivate, develop, and make much of
that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, enter and remain in the cessation of
perception and feeling.' Without charging at the cessation of perception
and feeling, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling.

When a mendicant enters and emerges from all these attainments, their
mind becomes pliable and workable. With a pliable and workable mind,
their immersion becomes limitless and well developed. They extend the
mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by
insight; and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and
every one is within range.

They might wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying myself and becoming one again ... controlling my body as far
as the Brahmā realm.' They are capable of realizing it, since each and
every one is within range.

They might wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.' They are capable of realizing it, since each and every one is
within range.

They might wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
... scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that
is not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in samādhi ...
mind not immersed in samādhi ... freed mind ... and unfreed mind as
"unfreed mind".' They are capable of realizing it, since each and every
one is within range.

They might wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' They're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

They might wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may
I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.'
They're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

They might wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' They're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range."

</article>
<article id="an9.36">

#### [AN 9.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Depending on Absorption ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I say that the first absorption is a basis for ending the
defilements. The second absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The third absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The fourth absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The dimension of infinite space is also a basis for ending
the defilements. The dimension of infinite consciousness is also a basis
for ending the defilements. The dimension of nothingness is also a basis
for ending the defilements. The dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception is also a basis for ending the defilements. The cessation
of perception and feeling is also a basis for ending the defilements.

'The first absorption is a basis for ending the defilements.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who, quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. They turn their mind away from those things, and
apply it to freedom from death: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements.
If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the
five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their
passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and
are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way a noble
disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, enters and remains in
the first absorption. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent,
as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn
their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death:
'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all
activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving,
fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 'The
first absorption is a basis for ending the defilements.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'The second absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The third absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The fourth absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The dimension of infinite space is also a basis for ending the
defilements.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite space. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as
suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn
their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death:
'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all
activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving,
fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way, take a
mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. ...
'The dimension of infinite space is a basis for ending the defilements.'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The dimension of infinite consciousness is a basis for ending the
defilements.' ...

'The dimension of nothingness is a basis for ending the defilements.'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who, going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', enters and remains in the dimension of
nothingness. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn their mind
away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death: 'This is
peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the
letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away,
cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of
defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because
of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way, take a
mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as
impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery,
as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self.
They turn their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom
from death: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling
of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they
attain the ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of
defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn
spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world. 'The dimension of nothingness is a basis for ending the
defilements.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

And so, mendicants, penetration to enlightenment extends as far as
attainments with perception. But the two dimensions that depend on
these---the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and the
cessation of perception and feeling---are properly explained by
mendicants who are skilled in these attainments and skilled in emerging
from them, after they've entered them and emerged from them."

</article>
<article id="an9.37">

#### [AN 9.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [By Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery. There Ānanda addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found
an opening amid confinement. It's in order to purify sentient beings, to
get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to
discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

The eye itself is actually present, and so are those sights. Yet one
will not experience that sense-field. The ear itself is actually
present, and so are those sounds. Yet one will not experience that
sense-field. The nose itself is actually present, and so are those
smells. Yet one will not experience that sense-field. The tongue itself
is actually present, and so are those tastes. Yet one will not
experience that sense-field. The body itself is actually present, and so
are those touches. Yet one will not experience that sense-field."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, is one who doesn't experience that sense-field
actually percipient or not?"

"Reverend, one who doesn't experience that sense-field is actually
percipient, not non-percipient."

"But what does one who doesn't experience that sense-field perceive?"

"It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. One who doesn't experience that sense-field
perceives in this way.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. One who doesn't experience that
sense-field perceives in this way.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. One who doesn't experience that
sense-field perceives in this way.

Reverend, this one time I was staying near Sāketa in the deer park in
Añjana Wood. Then the nun Jaṭilagāhikā came up to me, bowed, stood to
one side, and said to me: 'Honorable Ānanda, regarding the immersion
that does not lean forward or pull back, and is not held in place by
forceful suppression. Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's
content. Being content, one is not anxious. What did the Buddha say was
the fruit of this immersion?'

When she said this, I said to her: 'Sister, regarding the immersion that
does not lean forward or pull back, and is not held in place by forceful
suppression. Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being
content, one is not anxious. The Buddha said that the fruit of this
immersion is enlightenment.' One who doesn't experience that sense-field
perceives in this way, too."

</article>
<article id="an9.38">

#### [AN 9.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Brahmin Cosmologists ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lokāyatikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then two brahmin cosmologists went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, they sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, Pūraṇa Kassapa claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing,
to know and see everything without exception, thus: 'Knowledge and
vision are constantly and continually present to me, while walking,
standing, sleeping, and waking.' He says: 'With infinite knowledge I
know and see that the cosmos is infinite.' And the Jain ascetic of the
Ñātika clan also claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and
see everything without exception, thus: 'Knowledge and vision are
constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing,
sleeping, and waking.' He says: 'With infinite knowledge I know and see
that the cosmos is finite.' These two claim to speak from knowledge, but
they directly contradict each other. Which one of them speaks the truth,
and which falsehood?"

"Enough, brahmins, let that be. I will teach you the Dhamma. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," those brahmins replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose there were four men standing in the four quarters. Each of them
was extremely fast, with an extremely mighty stride. They're as fast as
a light arrow easily shot across the shadow of a palm tree by a
well-trained expert archer with a strong bow. Their stride was such that
it spanned from the eastern ocean to the western ocean. Then the man
standing in the east would say: 'I will reach the end of the world by
traveling.' Though he'd travel for his whole lifespan of a hundred
years---pausing only to eat and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to
dispel weariness---he'd die along the way, never reaching the end of the
world. Then the man standing in the west ... Then the man standing in
the north ... Then the man standing in the south would say: 'I will
reach the end of the world by traveling.' Though he'd travel for his
whole lifespan of a hundred years---pausing only to eat and drink, go to
the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness---he'd die along the way,
never reaching the end of the world. Why is that? I say it's not
possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by running like
this. But I also say there's no making an end of suffering without
reaching the end of the world.

These five kinds of sensual stimulation are called the world in the
training of the Noble One. What five? Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These five kinds of sensual
stimulation are called the world in the training of the Noble One.

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is called a mendicant who, having
gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the world. Others
say of them: 'They're included in the world, and haven't yet left the
world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in the world, and haven't
yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called a
mendicant who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end
of the world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and
haven't yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in
the world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant
who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the
world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and haven't
yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in the
world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. ... the dimension of nothingness ... the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is called a
mendicant who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end
of the world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and
haven't yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in
the world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. This is called a mendicant who, having gone
to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the world. And they've
crossed over clinging to the world."

</article>
<article id="an9.39">

#### [AN 9.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The War Between the Gods and the Titans ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devāsurasaṅgāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and
the titans. In that battle the titans won and the gods lost. Defeated,
the gods fled north with the titans in pursuit.

Then the gods thought, 'The titans are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a second time?' And so a second battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a second time the titans won
and the gods lost. Defeated, the gods fled north with the titans in
pursuit.

Then the gods thought, 'The titans are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a third time?' And so a third battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a third time the titans won and
the gods lost. Defeated and terrified, the gods fled right into the
castle of the gods.

When they had entered their castle, they thought, 'Now we're in a secure
location and the titans can't do anything to us.' The titans also
thought, 'Now the gods are in a secure location and we can't do anything
to them.'

Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.
In that battle the gods won and the titans lost. Defeated, the titans
fled south with the gods in pursuit.

Then the titans thought, 'The gods are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a second time?' And so a second battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a second time the gods won and
the titans lost. Defeated, the titans fled south with the gods in
pursuit.

Then the titans thought, 'The gods are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a third time?' And so a third battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a third time the gods won and
the titans lost. Defeated and terrified, the titans fled right into the
citadel of the titans.

When they had entered their citadel, they thought, 'Now we're in a
secure location and the gods can't do anything to us.' And the gods also
thought, 'Now the titans are in a secure location and we can't do
anything to them.'

In the same way, there's a time when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. At that time
the mendicant thinks, 'Now I'm in a secure location and Māra can't do
anything to me.' And Māra the Wicked also thinks, 'Now the mendicant is
in a secure location and we can't do anything to them.'

There's a time when, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected
are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. At that time the mendicant
thinks, 'Now I'm in a secure location and Māra can't do anything to me.'
And Māra the Wicked also thinks, 'Now the mendicant is in a secure
location and we can't do anything to them.'

There's a time when a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant
who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where
the Wicked One cannot see.

There's a time when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ... Going totally
beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is
nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.
... Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and
remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. ...

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end.
This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes
without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see. And they've
crossed over clinging to the world."

</article>
<article id="an9.40">

#### [AN 9.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Simile of the Bull Elephant in the Forest ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when a wild bull elephant is engrossed in the pasture, but
other elephants---males, females, younglings, or cubs---got there first
and trampled the grass, the wild bull elephant is horrified, repelled,
and disgusted by that. When the wild bull elephant is engrossed in the
pasture, but other elephants---males, females, younglings, or cubs---eat
the broken branches that he has dragged down, the wild bull elephant is
horrified, repelled, and disgusted by that. When a wild bull elephant
has plunged into the pool, but other elephants---males, females,
younglings, or cubs---got there first and stirred up the water with
their trunks, the wild bull elephant is horrified, repelled, and
disgusted by that. When a wild bull elephant has come out of the pool
and the female elephants bump into him, the wild bull elephant is
horrified, repelled, and disgusted by that.

At that time the wild bull elephant thinks: 'These days I live crowded
by other males, females, younglings, and cubs. I eat the grass they've
trampled, and they eat the broken branches I've dragged down. I drink
muddy water, and after my bath the female elephants bump into me. Why
don't I live alone, withdrawn from the herd?' After some time he lives
alone, withdrawn from the herd, and he eats untrampled grass, and other
elephants don't eat the broken branches he has dragged down. He doesn't
drink muddy water, and the female elephants don't bump into him after
his bath.

At that time the wild bull elephant thinks: 'Formerly I lived crowded by
other males, females, younglings, and cubs. I ate the grass they'd
trampled, and they ate the broken branches I'd dragged down. I drank
muddy water, and after my bath the female elephants bumped into me. Now
I live alone, and I'm free of all these things.' He breaks off a branch
and scratches his body, happily relieving his itches.

In the same way, when a mendicant lives crowded by monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen; by rulers and their ministers, and by monastics of other
religions and their disciples, they think: 'These days I live crowded by
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their ministers, and
monastics of other religions and their disciples. Why don't I live
alone, withdrawn from the group?' They frequent a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. Gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, they sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind free of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the
heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. They happily relieve their
itches. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled,
they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. They happily relieve their itches.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. They happily relieve their itches. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ...
Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. ... Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. ... Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally
beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters
and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen
with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. They happily relieve
their itches."

</article>
<article id="an9.41">

#### [AN 9.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Householder Tapussa ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tapussasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Mallas, near the
Mallian town named Uruvelakappa.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Uruvelakappa for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, you stay right here,
while I plunge deep into the Great Wood for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha plunged deep into the Great
Wood and sat at the root of a tree for the day's meditation.

The householder Tapussa went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Honorable Ānanda, we are laypeople who enjoy sensual pleasures. We like
sensual pleasures, we love them and take joy in them. But renunciation
seems like an abyss. I have heard that in this teaching and training
there are very young mendicants whose minds leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in renunciation. They see it as
peaceful. Renunciation is the dividing line between the multitude and
the mendicants in this teaching and training."

"Householder, we should see the Buddha about this matter. Come, let's go
to the Buddha and inform him about this. As he answers, so we'll
remember it."

"Yes, sir," replied Tapussa. Then Ānanda together with Tapussa went to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Ānanda told him what had
happened.

"That's so true, Ānanda! That's so true! Before my awakening---when I
was still unawakened but intent on awakening---I too thought,
'Renunciation is good! Seclusion is good!' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in renunciation.
I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the cause, what is
the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in renunciation? Why don't I see it as
peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of sensual
pleasures, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the
benefits of renunciation, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in renunciation. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then
I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, I
were to cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of
renunciation, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in
renunciation. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time,
I saw the drawbacks of sensual pleasures and cultivated that, and I
realized the benefits of renunciation and developed that. Then my mind
leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in
renunciation. I saw it as peaceful. And so, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in
the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. While I was in that
meditation, perception and focus accompanied by sensual pleasures beset
me, and that was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to
experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way,
when perception and focus accompanied by sensual pleasures beset me,
that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled ... enter and remain in the second absorption?'
But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in not placing the mind. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I
thought, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not
placing the mind? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I
haven't seen the drawbacks of placing the mind, and so I haven't
cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of not placing the
mind, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not placing
the mind. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of placing the mind, I were to
cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of not placing
the mind, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not placing
the mind. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I
saw the drawbacks of placing the mind and cultivated that, and I
realized the benefits of not placing the mind and developed that. Then
my mind did leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided
in not placing the mind. I saw it as peaceful. And so, as the placing of
the mind and keeping it connected were stilled ... I entered and
remained in the second absorption. While I was in that meditation,
perception and focus accompanied by placing the mind beset me, and that
was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when
perception and focus accompanied by placing the mind and keeping it
connected beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, with the fading away of rapture, enter and
remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss"?' But my
mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in freedom from rapture. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I
thought, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in freedom
from rapture? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I
haven't seen the drawbacks of rapture, and so I haven't cultivated that.
I haven't realized the benefits of freedom from rapture, and so I
haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in freedom from rapture. And
it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that,
seeing the drawbacks of rapture, I were to cultivate that. And suppose
that, realizing the benefits of freedom from rapture, I were to develop
that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in being free from rapture. And I would
see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I saw the drawbacks of
rapture and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of freedom from
rapture and developed that. Then my mind leapt forth, gained confidence,
settled down, and became decided in freedom from rapture. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, with the fading away of rapture ... I entered and
remained in the third absorption. While I was in that meditation,
perception and focus accompanied by rapture beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by rapture beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, with the giving up of pleasure and pain,
and the ending of former happiness and sadness, enter and remain in the
fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. I didn't
see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the cause, what is the
reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down,
and become decided in being without pleasure and pain? Why don't I see
it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of bliss
with equanimity, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized
the benefits of being without pleasure and pain, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. And
it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that,
seeing the drawbacks of bliss with equanimity, I were to cultivate that.
And suppose that, realizing the benefits of being without pleasure and
pain, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in being without
pleasure and pain. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some
time, I saw the drawbacks of bliss with equanimity and cultivated that,
and I realized the benefits of being without pleasure and pain and
developed that. Then my mind did leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, giving up pleasure and pain ... I entered and remained
in the fourth absorption. While I was in that meditation, perception and
focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset me, that was an
affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond perceptions of form,
with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite", enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite space?' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite space. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is
the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of infinite
space? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen
the drawbacks of forms, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't
realized the benefits of the dimension of infinite space, and so I
haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of infinite
space. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of forms, I were to cultivate that.
And suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of infinite
space, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite space. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some
time, I saw the drawbacks of forms and cultivated that, and I realized
the benefits of the dimension of infinite space and developed that. Then
my mind leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided
in the dimension of infinite space. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', I entered and remained in the dimension of infinite space.
While I was in that meditation, perception and focus accompanied by
forms beset me, and that was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy
person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In
the same way, when perception and focus accompanied by forms beset me,
that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", enter and remain
in the dimension of infinite consciousness?' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite consciousness. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought,
'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
infinite consciousness? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought,
'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite space, and so
I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of infinite consciousness, and so I haven't developed that.
That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down,
and become decided in the dimension of infinite consciousness. And it's
why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing
the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite space, I were to cultivate
that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of
infinite consciousness, I were to develop that. It's possible that my
mind would leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided
in the dimension of infinite consciousness. And I would see it as
peaceful.' And so, after some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension
of infinite space and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of
the dimension of infinite consciousness and developed that. Then my mind
leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', I entered and remained in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. While I was in that meditation, perception and
focus accompanied by the dimension of infinite space beset me, and that
was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when
perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of infinite space
beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enter and
remain in the dimension of nothingness?' But my mind did not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the
cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't
seen the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite consciousness, and so I
haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of nothingness, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in the dimension of nothingness. And it's why I don't see it as
peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the
dimension of infinite consciousness, I were to cultivate that. And
suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of nothingness, I
were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I
saw the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite consciousness and
cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of the dimension of
nothingness and developed that. Then my mind leapt forth, gained
confidence, settled down, and became decided in the dimension of
nothingness. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', I entered and remained in the dimension of nothingness. While I
was in that meditation, perception and focus accompanied by the
dimension of infinite consciousness beset me, and that was an affliction
for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite consciousness beset me, that
was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is
the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I
thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of nothingness,
and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I
thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the dimension of
nothingness, I were to cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the
benefits of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, I
were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so,
after some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension of nothingness and
cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception and developed that. Then my mind leapt
forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, I
entered and remained in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. While I was in that meditation, perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me, that was an
affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enter and remain in the cessation
of perception and feeling?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought,
'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought,
'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the
benefits of the cessation of perception and feeling, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in the cessation of perception and
feeling. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, I were to cultivate that. And suppose
that, realizing the benefits of the cessation of perception and feeling,
I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after
some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of
the cessation of perception and feeling and developed that. Then my mind
did leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the
cessation of perception and feeling. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, I
entered and remained in the cessation of perception and feeling. And,
having seen with wisdom, my defilements were ended.

As long as I hadn't entered into and withdrawn from these nine
progressive meditative attainments in both forward and reverse order, I
didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and
brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I had entered into and withdrawn from these nine progressive
meditative attainments in both forward and reverse order, I announced my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

</article>

[]{#an9-samannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Similarity {#an9-samannavagga.xhtml_an9-samannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.42">

#### [AN 9.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cramped ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sambādhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's
Monastery. Then Venerable Udāyī went up to Venerable Ānanda and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda, "Reverend, this
was said by the god Pañcālacaṇḍa:

> 'The opening amid confinement\
> was discovered by the Buddha of vast intelligence,\
> who woke up to absorption,\
> the sage, the solitary bull.'

But what is confinement, and what is the opening amid confinement that
the Buddha spoke of?"

"Reverend, these five kinds of sensual stimulation are called
'confinement' by the Buddha. What five? Sights known by the eye that are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of
sensual stimulation that are called 'confinement' by the Buddha.

Now, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever placing of the mind and
keeping it connected has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second
absorption. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an opening amid
confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined. Confined by
what? Whatever rapture has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture ...
enters and remains in the third absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of creating an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But
it is still confined. Confined by what? Whatever bliss with equanimity
has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain ...
enters and remains in the fourth absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of form has not
ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension
of infinite space has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still
confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension of
infinite consciousness has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an
opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined.
Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension of nothingness
has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an opening amid
confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined. Confined by
what? Whatever perception of neither perception nor non-perception has
not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an
opening amid confinement in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.43">

#### [AN 9.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Direct Witness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāyasakkhīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'direct witness'. What is the
direct witness that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. They meditate
directly experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the
Buddha spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense. Furthermore, take a
mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of infinite
consciousness ... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. They meditate directly experiencing that
dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the direct
witness in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.44">

#### [AN 9.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Freed by Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññāvimuttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'freed by wisdom'. What is the
one freed by wisdom that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. And they understand that
with wisdom. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed by wisdom
in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. And they understand that with wisdom. To
this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed by wisdom in a definitive
sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.45">

#### [AN 9.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Freed Both Ways ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ubhatobhāgavimuttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'freed both ways'. What is the
one freed both ways that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. And they understand that with
wisdom. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed both ways in a
qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. They meditate directly experiencing that
dimension in every way. And they understand that with wisdom. To this
extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed both ways in a definitive
sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.46">

#### [AN 9.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [In the Present Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sandiṭṭhikadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'. In
what way did the Buddha speak of a teaching apparent in the present
life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the teaching apparent in the present life in a qualified sense.
...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the
teaching apparent in the present life in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.47">

#### [AN 9.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment Is Apparent in the Present Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sandiṭṭhikanibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they say that 'extinguishment is apparent in the present
life'. In what way did the Buddha say extinguishment is apparent in the
present life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
said that extinguishment is apparent in the present life in a qualified
sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha said that
extinguishment is apparent in the present life in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.48">

#### [AN 9.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.49">

#### [AN 9.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Full Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parinibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'full extinguishment'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.50">

#### [AN 9.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment in a Certain Respect ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tadaṅganibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment in a certain respect'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.51">

#### [AN 9.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Extinguishment in the Present Life ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Diṭṭhadhammanibbānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment in the present life'. In what
way did the Buddha speak of extinguishment in the present life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of extinguishment in the present life in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
extinguishment in the present life in a definitive sense."

</article>

[]{#an9-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an9-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an9-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on a Safe Place {#an9-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an9-khemavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.52">

#### [AN 9.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Safe Place ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khemasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'a safe place'. In what way did the Buddha
speak of a safe place?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of a safe place in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of a safe
place in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.53">

#### [AN 9.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reaching a Safe Place ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khemappattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching a safe place'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.54">

#### [AN 9.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Freedom From Death ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Amatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'freedom from death'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.55">

#### [AN 9.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reaching Freedom From Death ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Amatappattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching freedom from death'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.56">

#### [AN 9.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Place Without Fear ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'a place without fear'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.57">

#### [AN 9.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Reaching a Place Without Fear ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhayappattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching a place without fear'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.58">

#### [AN 9.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Tranquility ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Passaddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'tranquility'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.59">

#### [AN 9.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Progressive Tranquility ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupubbapassaddhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'progressive tranquility'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.60">

#### [AN 9.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cessation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nirodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'cessation'. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.61">

#### [AN 9.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Progressive Cessation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anupubbanirodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Reverend, they speak of 'progressive cessation'. What is the
progressive cessation that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of progressive cessation in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
progressive cessation in a definitive sense."

</article>
<article id="an9.62">

#### [AN 9.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Requirements for Perfection ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up nine things you can't realize perfection.
What nine? Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt,
jealousy, and stinginess. Without giving up these nine things you can't
realize perfection.

After giving up nine things you can realize perfection. What nine?
Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, and
stinginess. After giving up these nine things you can realize the fruit
of perfection."

</article>

[]{#an9-satipatthanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Mindfulness Meditation {#an9-satipatthanavagga.xhtml_an9-satipatthanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.63">

#### [AN 9.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Weaknesses in Training and Mindfulness Meditation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhādubbalyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind ... They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
To give up those five weaknesses in your training you should develop
these four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

</article>
<article id="an9.64">

#### [AN 9.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hindrances ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nīvaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five hindrances. What five? Sensual desire,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
These are the five hindrances.

To give up these five hindrances you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of the mind ...
They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. To give up
those five hindrances you should develop these four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

</article>
<article id="an9.65">

#### [AN 9.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kinds of Sensual Stimulation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāmaguṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What
five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

To give up these five kinds of sensual stimulation you should develop
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.66">

#### [AN 9.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grasping Aggregates ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upādānakkhandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? The
grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. These are the five grasping aggregates.

To give up these five grasping aggregates you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.67">

#### [AN 9.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lower Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Orambhāgiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five lower fetters. What five? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

To give up these five lower fetters you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.68">

#### [AN 9.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Places of Rebirth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gatisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five destinations. What five? Hell, the animal
realm, the ghost realm, humanity, and the gods. These are the five
destinations.

To give up these five destinations you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.69">

#### [AN 9.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stinginess ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Macchariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of stinginess. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teaching. These are the five kinds of stinginess.

To give up these five kinds of stinginess you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.70">

#### [AN 9.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Higher Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uddhambhāgiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

To give up these five higher fetters you should develop the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.71">

#### [AN 9.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard-heartedness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetokhilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are five kinds of hard-heartedness. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual
companions, resentful and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the fifth kind of hard-heartedness.

To give up these five kinds of hard-heartedness you should develop the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

</article>
<article id="an9.72">

#### [AN 9.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shackles of the Heart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetasovinibandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind
doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the first shackle of the heart.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart. These are the five
shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind ... They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop these
four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

</article>

[]{#an9-sammappadhanavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Right Efforts {#an9-sammappadhanavagga.xhtml_an9-sammappadhanavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.73">

#### [AN 9.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Weaknesses in Training and Effort ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four right efforts. What four? It's when a mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful
qualities that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not
lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. To give up
these five weaknesses in your training you should develop these four
right efforts."

</article>
<article id="an9.74-81">

#### [AN 9.74--81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hindrances, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nīvaraṇasuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

(Tell in full as in the chapter on mindfulness meditation.)

</article>
<article id="an9.82">

#### [AN 9.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shackles of the Heart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetasovinibandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. ... These are the five
shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
right efforts. What four? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. ... so that unskillful qualities are
given up ... so that skillful qualities arise ... They generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that
skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase,
mature, and are completed by development. To give up these five shackles
of the hearts you should develop these four right efforts."

</article>

[]{#an9-iddhipadavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Bases of Psychic Power {#an9-iddhipadavagga.xhtml_an9-iddhipadavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.83">

#### [AN 9.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Weaknesses in Training and the Bases of Psychic Power ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. To give up these five weaknesses in your
training you should develop these four bases of psychic power."

</article>
<article id="an9.84-91">

#### [AN 9.84--91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hindrances, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nīvaraṇasuttādi]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

(Tell in full as in the chapter on mindfulness meditation.)

</article>
<article id="an9.92">

#### [AN 9.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Shackles of the Heart ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetasovinibandhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed for sensual pleasures. ...
These are the five shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry,
and active effort. To give up these five shackles of the heart you
should develop these four bases of psychic power."

</article>

[]{#an9-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an9-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an9-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an9.93">

#### [AN 9.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, nine things should be developed. What nine? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction
with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self
in suffering, giving up, and fading away. For insight into greed, these
nine things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an9.94">

#### [AN 9.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, nine things should be developed. What nine? The
first absorption, the second absorption, the third absorption, the
fourth absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, and the cessation of perception
and feeling. For insight into greed, these nine things should be
developed."

</article>
<article id="an9.95-112">

#### [AN 9.95--112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of greed ... these nine things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an9.113-432">

#### [AN 9.113--432]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain
... contempt ... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ...
deviousness ... obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ...
vanity ... for insight into negligence ... complete understanding ...
complete ending ... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away
... ceasing ... giving away ... letting go of negligence ... these nine
things should be developed."

The Book of the Nines is finished.

</article>

[]{#an10.xhtml}

# The Book of the Tens {#an10.xhtml_an10 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an10-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an10-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an10-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Benefits {#an10-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an10-anisamsavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.1">

#### [AN 10.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [What's the Purpose? ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kimatthiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Venerable
Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"Sir, what is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics?"

"Ānanda, having no regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful
ethics."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets?"

"Joy is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of joy?"

"Rapture ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of rapture?"

"Tranquility ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?"

"Bliss ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of bliss?"

"Immersion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of immersion?"

"Truly knowing and seeing ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?"

"Disillusionment and dispassion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion?"

"Knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of
disillusionment and dispassion.

So, Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics is not having
regrets. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Rapture
is the purpose and benefit of joy. Tranquility is the purpose and
benefit of rapture. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility.
Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. Truly knowing and seeing
is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Disillusionment and dispassion
is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Knowledge and
vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and
dispassion. So, Ānanda, skillful ethics progressively lead up to the
highest."

</article>
<article id="an10.2">

#### [AN 10.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Making a Wish ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetanākaraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need
not make a wish: 'May I have no regrets!' It's only natural that an
ethical person has no regrets. When you have no regrets you need not
make a wish: 'May I feel joy!' It's only natural that joy springs up
when you have no regrets. When you feel joy you need not make a wish:
'May I experience rapture!' It's only natural that rapture arises when
you're joyful. When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a
wish: 'May my body become tranquil!' It's only natural that your body
becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture. When your body is
tranquil you need not make a wish: 'May I feel bliss!' It's only natural
to feel bliss when your body is tranquil. When you feel bliss you need
not make a wish: 'May my mind be immersed in samādhi!' It's only natural
for the mind to be immersed in samādhi when you feel bliss. When your
mind is immersed in samādhi you need not make a wish: 'May I truly know
and see!' It's only natural to truly know and see when your mind is
immersed in samādhi. When you truly know and see you need not make a
wish: 'May I become disillusioned and dispassionate!' It's only natural
to become disillusioned and dispassionate when you truly know and see.
When you're disillusioned and dispassionate you need not make a wish:
'May I realize the knowledge and vision of freedom!' It's only natural
to realize the knowledge and vision of freedom when you're disillusioned
and dispassionate.

And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose
and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. Disillusionment and
dispassion is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Truly
knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Immersion is
the purpose and benefit of bliss. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of
tranquility. Tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture. Rapture
is the purpose and benefit of joy. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not
having regrets. Not having regrets is the purpose and benefit of
skillful ethics. And so, mendicants, good qualities flow on and fill up
from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore."

</article>
<article id="an10.3">

#### [AN 10.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaupanisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no
joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When
there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital
condition for tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks
tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no
bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right
immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right
immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.
When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge
and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and
dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who
lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.4">

#### [AN 10.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaupanisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants ... "Reverends, an
unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for
having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who has regrets has
destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks disillusionment
and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision
of freedom. Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. In
the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. ... One who has
fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom. Suppose there was a tree that was
complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and
heartwood would grow to fullness. In the same way, an ethical person,
who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having
regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled
a vital condition for joy. ... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and
dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.5">

#### [AN 10.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaupanisasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Ānanda addressed the mendicants ... "Reverends, an
unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for
having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who has regrets has
destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no joy, one who lacks
joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When there is no
rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for
tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has
destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no bliss, one who
lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. When
there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed
a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is no true
knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has
destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.6">

#### [AN 10.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in
fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this
world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they
would still perceive."

"It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this
world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they
would still perceive."

"But how could this be, sir?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They
wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air
in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of infinite space in
the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness
in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness
in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this world in this world, or
the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive."

</article>
<article id="an10.7">

#### [AN 10.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sāriputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāriputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

"Could it be, reverend Sāriputta, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in
water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the
dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they
wouldn't perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the
other world. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, Reverend Ānanda."

"But how could this be?"

"Reverend Ānanda, this one time I was staying right here at Sāvatthī in
the Dark Forest. There I gained a state of immersion like this. I didn't
perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air.
And I didn't perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension
of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the
dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the
dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. And I didn't perceive this world in this world, or the
other world in the other world. And yet I still perceived."

"But at that time what did Reverend Sāriputta perceive?"

"One perception arose in me and another perception ceased: 'The
cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of
continued existence is extinguishment.' Suppose there was a burning pile
of twigs. One flame would arise and another would cease. In the same
way, one perception arose in me and another perception ceased: 'The
cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of
continued existence is extinguishment.' At that time I perceived that
the cessation of continued existence is extinguishment."

</article>
<article id="an10.8">

#### [AN 10.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring All Around: the Absorptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jhānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful and ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and
ethical, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an expert in the
monastic law ... they don't stay in the wilderness, in remote lodgings
... they don't get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the
present life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without
trouble or difficulty ... they don't realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're
complete in that respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is
inspiring all around, and is complete in every respect."

</article>
<article id="an10.9">

#### [AN 10.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring All Around: the Peaceful Liberations ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Santavimokkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. ... they're not learned. ...
they're not a Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they
don't teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an
expert in the training ... they don't stay in the wilderness, in remote
lodgings ... they don't have direct meditative experience of the
peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form ... they don't
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should
fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned,
a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma
to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives
in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless
liberations, and one who lives having realized the ending of
defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the monastic law, one who lives in the
wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless liberations,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're
complete in that respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is
inspiring all around, and is complete in every respect."

</article>
<article id="an10.10">

#### [AN 10.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inspiring All Around: the Three Knowledges ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vijjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. So they're incomplete in that
respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful and
ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're complete
in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an expert in the
monastic law ... they don't recollect their many kinds of past lives ...
they don't, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, see
sentient beings passing away and being reborn ... they don't realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill
it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma
speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the
assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects
their many kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses
the human sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one
who lives having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they are faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects their many
kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses the human
sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in that
respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is inspiring all
around, and is complete in every respect."

</article>

[]{#an10-nathavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on a Protector {#an10-nathavagga.xhtml_an10-nathavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.11">

#### [AN 10.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lodgings ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Senāsanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting
lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

And how does a mendicant have five factors? It's when a noble disciple
has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely
ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or
deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible
spiritual companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. That's how a mendicant has five factors.

And how does a lodging have five factors? It's when a lodging is neither
too far nor too near, but convenient for coming and going. It's not
bothered by people by day, and at night it's quiet and still. There's
little disturbance from flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.
While staying in that lodging the necessities of life---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
And in that lodging there are several senior mendicants who are very
learned, inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings,
the monastic law, and the outlines. From time to time they go up to
those mendicants and ask them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a lodging has five factors. A mendicant with five factors,
using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements."

</article>
<article id="an10.12">

#### [AN 10.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Five Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up
five factors and possesses five factors is called consummate,
accomplished, a supreme person.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant have five factors? It's when a mendicant has
the entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom,
and knowledge and vision of freedom. That's how a mendicant has five
factors.

In this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up five factors
and possesses five factors is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme
person.

> Sensual desire, ill will,\
> dullness and drowsiness,\
> restlessness, and doubt\
> are not found in a mendicant at all.
>
> One like this is accomplished\
> in an adept's ethics,\
> an adept's immersion,\
> and freedom and knowledge.
>
> Possessing these five factors,\
> and rid of five factors,\
> in this teaching and training\
> they're called 'consummate'."

</article>
<article id="an10.13">

#### [AN 10.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fetters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁyojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten fetters. What ten? The five lower fetters and
the five higher fetters. What are the five lower fetters? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

What are the five higher fetters? Desire for rebirth in the realm of
luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit,
restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters. These
are the ten fetters."

</article>
<article id="an10.14">

#### [AN 10.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hard-heartedness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetokhilasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a monk or nun who has not given up five kinds of
hard-heartedness and has not severed five shackles of the heart can
expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by
night.

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't given up?

Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness they haven't given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual
companions, resentful and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they haven't given up. These are the
five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed? Firstly, a
mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind doesn't incline
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first shackle of the heart they haven't severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart they haven't
severed. These are the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed.

A monk or nun who has not given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness
and has not severed these five shackles of the heart can expect decline,
not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

It's like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night,
its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only
decline. In the same way, monk or nun who has not given up these five
kinds of hard-heartedness and has not severed these five shackles of the
heart can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by
day or by night.

A monk or nun who has given up five kinds of hard-heartedness and has
severed five shackles of the heart can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they've given up? Firstly, a
mendicant has no doubts about the Teacher. They're not uncertain,
undecided, or lacking confidence. This being so, their mind inclines
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first kind of hard-heartedness they've given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has no doubts about the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... the training ... A mendicant is not angry and upset with their
spiritual companions, not resentful or closed off. This being so, their
mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they've given up. These are
the five kinds of hard-heartedness they've given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they've severed? Firstly, a
mendicant is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind inclines toward
keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the first
shackle of the heart they've severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant is rid of greed for the body ... They're rid of
greed for form ... They don't eat as much as they like until their belly
is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and
drowsing ... They don't lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and
striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart they've severed. These
are the five shackles of the heart they've severed.

A monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and
has severed these five shackles of the heart can expect growth, not
decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

It's like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether by day or by night,
its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only grow.
In the same way, a monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of
hard-heartedness and has severed these five shackles of the heart can
expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by
night."

</article>
<article id="an10.15">

#### [AN 10.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Diligence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Appamādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and
meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and
meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In
the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at
diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. In the
same way ...

Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way ...

Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the
same way ...

All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the
same way ...

The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. In the same way ...

In the autumn the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates. In the same way ...

All the great rivers---that is, the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū,
and Mahī---flow, slant, slope, and incline towards the ocean, and the
ocean is said to be the greatest of them. In the same way, all skillful
qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence
is said to be the best of them."

</article>
<article id="an10.16">

#### [AN 10.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What ten? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha; an Independent Buddha; one freed both ways; one freed by wisdom;
a direct witness; one attained to view; one freed by faith; a follower
by faith; a follower of teachings; a lamb of the flock. These are the
ten people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world."

</article>
<article id="an10.17">

#### [AN 10.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Protector (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanāthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should live with a protector, not without one. Living
without a protector is suffering. There are ten qualities that serve as
protector. What ten? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the
monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable
places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules
they've undertaken. This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

You should live with a protector, not without one. Living without a
protector is suffering. These are the ten qualities that serve as
protector."

</article>
<article id="an10.18">

#### [AN 10.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Protector (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanāthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, you should live with a protector, not without one. Living
without a protector is suffering. There are ten qualities that serve as
protector. What ten? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the
monastic code, conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable
places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules
they've undertaken. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation,
mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or
junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being
treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants,
that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. Knowing this, the
mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that mendicant is
worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the
senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only
growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. Knowing
this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that
mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such
kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant
can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Knowing this, the
mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that mendicant is
worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the
senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only
growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

You should live with a protector, not without one. Living without a
protector is suffering. These are the ten qualities that serve as
protector."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

</article>
<article id="an10.19">

#### [AN 10.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Abodes of the Noble Ones (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaariyāvāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide. What ten? A mendicant has given up
five factors, is endowed with six factors, has a single guard, has four
supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has
totally given up searching, has pure intentions, has stilled the
physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.
These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide."

</article>
<article id="an10.20">

#### [AN 10.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Abodes of the Noble Ones (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaariyāvāsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the
Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide. What ten? A mendicant has given up
five factors, possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four
supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has
totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the
physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? It's when a mendicant,
seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain
equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ...
Smelling an odor with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue
...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware. That's how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. For example: the cosmos is eternal, or not
eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same
thing, or they are different things; after death, a realized one still
exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists,
or neither still exists nor no longer exists. A mendicant has dispelled,
eliminated, thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished
all these. That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual life. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when a
mendicant has given up intentions of sensuality, malice, and cruelty.
That's how a mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.

Mendicants, whether in the past, future, or present, all noble ones
abide in these same ten abodes of the noble ones. These are the ten
abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present,
and future abide."

</article>

[]{#an10-mahavagga.xhtml}

### The Great Chapter {#an10-mahavagga.xhtml_an10-mahavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.21">

#### [AN 10.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Lion's Roar ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīhanādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. Why is that? 'May I not
injure any little creatures on unclear ground.'

'Lion' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly,
this is his lion's roar.

The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel. What ten? Firstly, the Realized One truly
understands the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
Relying on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of
practice lead. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many
and diverse elements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions
of sentient beings. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of
the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his
mind. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' Thus he
recollects his many past lives, with features and details. Since he
truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and
they acted out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right
view; and they acted out of that right view. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so,
with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he sees sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. Since he truly understands
this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly
understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One
possesses. With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel."

</article>
<article id="an10.22">

#### [AN 10.22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hypotheses ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhivuttipadasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, I claim to be assured regarding the teachings that lead to
realizing by insight the various different hypotheses. So I am able to
teach the Dhamma in appropriate ways to different people. Practicing
accordingly, when something exists they'll know it exists. When it
doesn't exist they'll know it doesn't exist. When something is inferior
they'll know it's inferior. When it's superior they'll know it's
superior. When something is not supreme they'll know it's not supreme.
When it is supreme they'll know it's supreme. And they will know or see
or realize it in whatever way it should be known or seen or realized.
This is possible. But this is the unsurpassable knowledge, that is:
truly knowing each and every case. And Ānanda, I say that there is no
other knowledge better or finer than this.

The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel. What ten? Firstly, the Realized One truly
understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
Relying on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of
practice lead. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many
and diverse elements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions
of sentient beings. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of
the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his
mind. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly
understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One
possesses. With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel."

</article>
<article id="an10.23">

#### [AN 10.23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Body ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are things that should be given up by the body, not
by speech. There are things that should be given up by speech, not by
the body. There are things that should be given up neither by the body,
nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

And what are the things that should be given up by the body, not by
speech? It's when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of body. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say
this to them: 'Venerable, you've committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of body. Please give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good
bodily conduct.' When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions
they give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.
These are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech.

And what are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the
body? It's when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of speech. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say
this to them: 'Venerable, you've committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of speech. Please give up that bad verbal conduct and develop
good verbal conduct.' When spoken to by their sensible spiritual
companions they give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal
conduct. These are the things that should be given up by speech, not by
the body.

And what are the things that should be given up neither by the body, nor
by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom? Greed ... hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... and
stinginess are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor
by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

Nasty jealousy should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech,
but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what is nasty jealousy?
It's when a householder or their child is prospering in money, grain,
silver, or gold. And a bondservant or dependent thinks: 'Oh, may that
householder or their child not prosper in money, grain, silver, or
gold!' Or an ascetic or brahmin receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. And some other ascetic or brahmin
thinks: 'Oh, may that ascetic or brahmin not receive robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.' This is called nasty
jealousy.

Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech,
but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what are corrupt wishes?
It's when a faithless person wishes to be known as faithful. An
unethical person wishes to be known as ethical. An unlearned person
wishes to be known as learned. A lover of company wishes to be known as
secluded. A lazy person wishes to be known as energetic. An unmindful
person wishes to be known as mindful. A person without immersion wishes
to be known as having immersion. A witless person wishes to be known as
wise. A person who has not ended the defilements wishes to be known as
having ended the defilements. These are called corrupt wishes. Corrupt
wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by
seeing again and again with wisdom.

Suppose that greed masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master them and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the
understanding that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and
keeps going. They don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes
master them and keep going.'

Suppose that greed does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or
that hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master
that mendicant and keep going. You should know of them: 'This venerable
has the understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master
them and keep going. They have the understanding that eliminates hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes
don't master them and keep going.'"

</article>
<article id="an10.24">

#### [AN 10.24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [By Mahācunda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahācundasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Mahācunda was staying in the land of the Cetīs at
Sahajāti. There he addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahācunda said this:

"Reverends, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge says: 'I
know this teaching, I see this teaching.' Suppose that greed masters
that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You should know
of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding that would
eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They don't have
the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of development says: 'I am developed
in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of both knowledge and development
says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am developed in
physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

Suppose a poor, needy, and penniless person was to declare themselves to
be rich, affluent, and wealthy. But when it came time to make a payment
they weren't able to come up with any money, grain, silver, or gold.
They would know of them: 'This person declares themselves to be rich,
affluent, and wealthy, but they are in fact poor, penniless, and needy.'
Why is that? Because when it came time to make a payment they weren't
able to come up with any money, grain, silver, or gold.

In the same way, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge and
development says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am
developed in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that
greed masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion
... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge says: 'I know this
teaching, I see this teaching.' Suppose that greed does not master that
mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep going. You should
know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding that eliminates
greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They have the
understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony
... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... and
corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of development says: 'I am developed
in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion
... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding
that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They
have the understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of both knowledge and development
says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am developed in
physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed does
not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding
that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They
have the understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

Suppose a rich, affluent, and wealthy person was to declare themselves
to be rich, affluent, and wealthy. And whenever it came time to make a
payment they were able to come up with the money, grain, silver, or
gold. They would know of them: 'This person declares themselves to be
rich, affluent, and wealthy, and they are in fact rich, affluent, and
wealthy.' Why is that? Because when it came time to make a payment they
were able to come up with the money, grain, silver, or gold.

In the same way, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge and
development says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am
developed in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that
greed does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess
... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and
keep going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the
understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and
keep going. They have the understanding that eliminates hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess
... nasty jealousy ... and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't
master them and keep going.'"

</article>
<article id="an10.25">

#### [AN 10.25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Meditation on Universals ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kasiṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these ten universal dimensions of meditation.
What ten? Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above,
below, across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. These are the ten universal dimensions
of meditation."

</article>
<article id="an10.26">

#### [AN 10.26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kāḷī ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāḷīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis
near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

Then the laywoman Kāḷī of Kurughara went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, this was said by the
Buddha in 'The Maidens' Questions':

> 'I've reached the goal, peace of heart.\
> Having conquered the army `<j>`{=html}of the likable and pleasant,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.\
> That's why I don't get too close to people,\
> and no-one gets too close to me.'

How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Sister, some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the
meditation on universal earth to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is the
goal', they are reborn. The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the
attainment of the meditation on universal earth was the ultimate.
Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the
escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what
is not the path. Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the
escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what
is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart.

Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on
universal water to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is the goal', they
are reborn. ... Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the
meditation on universal fire ... universal air ... universal blue ...
universal yellow ... universal red ... universal white ... universal
space ... universal consciousness to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is
the goal', they are reborn. The Buddha directly knew the extent to which
the attainment of the meditation on universal consciousness was the
ultimate. Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and
the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and
what is not the path. Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and
the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and
what is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of
heart.

So, sister, that's how to understand the detailed meaning of what the
Buddha said in brief in 'The Maiden's Questions':

> 'I've reached the goal, peace of heart.\
> Having conquered the army `<j>`{=html}of the likable and pleasant,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.\
> That's why I don't get too close to people,\
> and no-one gets too close to me.'"

</article>
<article id="an10.27">

#### [AN 10.27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Questions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamahāpañhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too
early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why don't we visit the monastery
of the wanderers of other religions?"

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers
said to them:

"Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this: 'Please,
mendicants, directly know all things. Meditate having directly known all
things.' We too teach our disciples: 'Please, reverends, directly know
all things. Live having directly known all things.' What, then, is the
difference between the ascetic Gotama's teaching and instruction and
ours?"

Those mendicants neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the
wanderers of other religions. They got up from their seat, thinking, "We
will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer. Two ...
three ... four ... five ... six ... seven ... eight ... nine ... ten
things: question, summary recital, and answer.' Questioned like this,
the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition,
would get frustrated. Why is that? Because they're out of their element.
I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions except
for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it from
them.

'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate,
and freed regarding one thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending
its meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life.
What one thing? 'All sentient beings are sustained by food.' Becoming
completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding this one
thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending its meaning, a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'One thing:
question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said, and this is
why I said it.

What two? Name and form. ...

What three? Three feelings. ...

What four? The four foods. ...

What five? The five grasping aggregates. ...

What six? The six interior sense fields. ...

What seven? The seven planes of consciousness. ...

What eight? The eight worldly conditions. ...

What nine? The nine abodes of sentient beings. ...

'Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate,
and freed regarding ten things, seeing their limits and fully
comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in
this very life. What ten? The ten ways of performing unskillful deeds.
Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding
these ten things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their
meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'Ten
things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.28">

#### [AN 10.28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Great Questions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamahāpañhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kajaṅgalā in a bamboo grove.
Then several lay followers of Kajaṅgalā went to the nun Kajaṅgalikā,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to her:

"Ma'am, this was said by the Buddha in 'The Great Questions': 'One
thing: question, summary recital, and answer. Two ... three ... four ...
five ... six ... seven ... eight ... nine ... ten things: question,
summary recital, and answer.' How should we see the detailed meaning of
the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Good people, I haven't heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha or from esteemed mendicants. But as to how it seems to me, listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, ma'am," replied the lay followers. The nun Kajaṅgalikā said this:

"'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the
Buddha said, but why did he say it? Becoming completely disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding one thing, seeing its limits and
fully comprehending its meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering
in this very life. What one thing? 'All sentient beings are sustained by
food.' Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed
regarding this one thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending its
meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'One
thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the Buddha
said, and this is why he said it.

What two? Name and form. ... What three? Three feelings. ...

With a mind well developed in four things---seeing their limits and
fully comprehending their meaning---a mendicant makes an end of
suffering in this very life. What four? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. ... With a mind well developed in these four things---seeing
their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a mendicant makes an
end of suffering in this very life. ...

What five? The five faculties. ... What six? The six elements of escape.
... What seven? The seven awakening factors. ... What eight? The noble
eightfold path. ...

Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding
nine things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their meaning,
a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. What nine? The
nine abodes of sentient beings. Becoming completely disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding these nine things, seeing their
limits and fully comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end
of suffering in this very life.

'Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the
Buddha said, but why did he say it? Becoming well developed in ten
things---seeing their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. What ten? The ten
ways of performing skillful deeds. With a mind well developed in these
ten things---seeing their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'Ten things:
question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the Buddha said, and
this is why he said it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in
brief in 'The Great Questions'. If you wish, you may go to the Buddha
and ask him about this. You should remember it in line with the Buddha's
answer."

"Yes, ma'am," replied those lay followers, approving and agreeing with
what the nun Kajaṅgalikā said. Then they got up from their seat, bowed,
and respectfully circled her, keeping her on their right. Then they went
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of
all they had discussed.

"Good, good, householders. The nun Kajaṅgalikā is astute, she has great
wisdom. If you came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in
exactly the same way as the nun Kajaṅgalikā. That is what it means, and
that's how you should remember it."

</article>
<article id="an10.29">

#### [AN 10.29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kosala (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakosalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"As far as Kāsi and Kosala extend, and as far as the dominion of King
Pasenadi of Kosala extends, King Pasenadi is said to be the foremost.
But even King Pasenadi decays and perishes.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

A galaxy extends a thousand times as far as the moon and sun revolve and
the shining ones light up the quarters. In that galaxy there are a
thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of mountains, a
thousand Black Plum Tree Lands, a thousand Western Continents, a
thousand Northern Continents, a thousand Eastern Continents, four
thousand oceans, four thousand great kings, a thousand realms of the
gods of the four great kings, a thousand realms of the gods of the
thirty-three, of the gods of Yama, of the joyful gods, of the gods who
love to imagine, of the gods who control what is imagined by others, and
a thousand Brahmā realms. As far as the galaxy extends, the Great Brahmā
is said to be the foremost. But even the Great Brahmā decays and
perishes.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There comes a time when this cosmos contracts. As it contracts, most
sentient beings migrate to the realm of streaming radiance. There they
are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time. When
the cosmos is contracting, the gods of streaming radiance are said to be
the foremost. But even the gods of streaming radiance decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these ten universal dimensions of meditation. What ten?
Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. These are the ten universal dimensions
of meditation.

The best of these ten universal dimensions of meditation is when someone
perceives the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. Some sentient beings perceive like
this. But even the sentient beings who perceive like this decay and
perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these eight dimensions of mastery. What eight? Perceiving form
internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and
ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the first
dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower that's
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi
that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the fifth
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, yellow,
with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak flower
that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow color and
yellow appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally, yellow, with yellow color and yellow
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, red, with
red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow flower
that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi
that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red appearance.
In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms
externally, red, with red color and red appearance. Mastering them, they
perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, white,
with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning star
that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally, white, with white color and white
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
eighth dimension of mastery. These are the eight dimensions of mastery.

The best of these dimensions of mastery is when someone, not perceiving
form internally, sees forms externally, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' Some
sentient beings perceive like this. But even the sentient beings who
perceive like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,
2.  painful practice with swift insight,
3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and
4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice.

The best of these four ways of practice is the pleasant practice with
swift insight. Some sentient beings practice like this. But even the
sentient beings who practice like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these four perceptions. What four?

1.  One person perceives the limited.
2.  One person perceives the expansive.
3.  One person perceives the limitless.
4.  One person, aware that 'there is nothing at all', perceives the
    dimension of nothingness.

These are the four perceptions.

The best of these four perceptions is when a person, aware that 'there
is nothing at all', perceives the dimension of nothingness. Some
sentient beings perceive like this. But even the sentient beings who
perceive like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

This is the best of the convictions of outsiders, that is: 'I might not
be, and it might not be mine. I will not be, and it will not be mine.'
When someone has such a view, you can expect that they will not be
attracted to continued existence, and they will not be repulsed by the
cessation of continued existence. Some sentient beings have such a view.
But even the sentient beings who have views like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who advocate the ultimate purity of
the spirit. This is the best of the advocates of the ultimate purity of
the spirit, that is, when someone, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. They teach Dhamma in order to directly know and
realize this. Some sentient beings have such a doctrine. But even the
sentient beings who have such a doctrine decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who advocate ultimate
extinguishment in this very life. This is the best of those who advocate
extinguishment in this very life, that is, liberation by not grasping
after truly understanding the origin, ending, gratification, drawback,
and escape of the six fields of contact. Though I state and assert this,
certain ascetics and brahmins misrepresent me with the incorrect,
hollow, false, untruthful claim: 'The ascetic Gotama doesn't advocate
the complete understanding of sensual pleasures, forms, or feelings.'
But I do advocate the complete understanding of sensual pleasures,
forms, and feelings. And I advocate full extinguishment by not grasping
in this very life, wishless, quenched, and cooled."

</article>
<article id="an10.30">

#### [AN 10.30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Kosala (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakosalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala returned from combat after
winning a battle and succeeding in his objective. Then King Pasenadi of
Kosala went to the monastery. He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot.

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, "Sirs, where is
the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha? For I want to see the Buddha."

"Great king, that's his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it
quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and
knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door."

So the king approached the Buddha's dwelling, cleared his throat and
knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door. Then King
Pasenadi entered the Buddha's dwelling. He bowed with his head at the
Buddha's feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and
pronounced his name: "Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! I am Pasenadi,
king of Kosala!"

"But great king, for what reason do you demonstrate such utmost devotion
for this body, conveying your manifest love?"

"Sir, it's because of my gratitude and thanks for the Buddha that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion, conveying my manifest love.

The Buddha is practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people. He
has established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles
of goodness and skillfulness. This is a reason that I demonstrate such
utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is
mature, noble, and skillful. This is another reason that I demonstrate
such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha lives in the wilderness, frequenting remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. This is another reason that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest
love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This is another
reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying
my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world. This is another reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion
for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when he wants, without trouble or difficulty.
That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion,
aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the
knowledge and vision of freedom. This is another reason that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest
love.

Furthermore, the Buddha gets the four absorptions---blissful meditations
in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when he wants,
without trouble or difficulty. This is another reason that I demonstrate
such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha recollects many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so he
recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. This
is another reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the
Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Buddha sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He
understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' He understands how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is another reason that
I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest
love.

Furthermore, the Buddha has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
his own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is another reason
that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my
manifest love.

Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience." Then King Pasenadi got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

</article>

[]{#an10-pathamapannasaka-upalivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Upāli {#an10-pathamapannasaka-upalivagga.xhtml_an10-pathamapannasaka-upalivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.31">

#### [AN 10.31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Upāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, for how many reasons did the Realized One lay down training rules
for his disciples and recite the monastic code?"

"Upāli, the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and
recited the monastic code for ten reasons. What ten? For the well-being
of the Saṅgha and for the comfort of the Saṅgha. For keeping difficult
persons in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants. For
restraining defilements that affect the present life and protecting
against defilements that affect lives to come. For inspiring confidence
in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it. For
the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training.
The Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited
the monastic code for these ten reasons."

</article>
<article id="an10.32">

#### [AN 10.32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Suspending the Recitation of the Monastic Code ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pātimokkhaṭṭhapanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many grounds are there to suspend the recitation of the
monastic code?"

"Upāli, there are ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic
code. What ten? A mendicant who has committed an expulsion offense is
sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has
committed an expulsion offense is unfinished. A person who is not fully
ordained is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone
is fully ordained or not is unfinished. Someone who has resigned the
training is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone
has rejected the training or not is unfinished. A eunuch is sitting in
the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is a eunuch is
unfinished. A raper of nuns is sitting in the assembly. A discussion
about whether or not someone is a raper of nuns is unfinished. These are
the ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code."

</article>
<article id="an10.33">

#### [AN 10.33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Judge ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ubbāhikāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be deemed a judge?"

"Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be deemed a judge. What
ten? It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. Both monastic codes have been passed
down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in
both the rules and accompanying material. They're firm and unfaltering
in the training. When there are opposing parties, they're able to
persuade, advocate, and convince them, make them see the other side and
trust each other. They're skilled in raising and settling disciplinary
issues. They know what a disciplinary issue is. They know how a
disciplinary issue originates. They know how a disciplinary issue
ceases. They know the practical way leading to the cessation of a
disciplinary issue. A mendicant should have these ten qualities to be
deemed a judge."

</article>
<article id="an10.34">

#### [AN 10.34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ordination ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upasampadāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to give ordination?"

"Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to give ordination. What
ten? It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. Both monastic codes have been passed
down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in
both the rules and accompanying material. They're able to care for the
sick or get someone else to do so. They're able to settle
dissatisfaction or get someone else to do so. They're able to dispel
remorse when it has come up. They're able to rationally dissuade someone
from misconceptions that come up. They're able to encourage someone in
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. A mendicant
should have these ten qualities to give ordination."

</article>
<article id="an10.35">

#### [AN 10.35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dependence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to give dependence?"

"Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to give dependence. What
ten? It's when a mendicant is ethical ... They're learned ... Both
monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed,
well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying
material. They're able to care for the sick or get someone else to do
so. They're able to settle dissatisfaction or get someone else to do so.
They're able to dispel remorse when it has come up. They're able to
rationally dissuade someone from misconceptions that come up. They're
able to encourage someone in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. A mendicant should have these ten qualities to give
dependence."

</article>
<article id="an10.36">

#### [AN 10.36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Novice ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāmaṇerasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be attended on by a
novice?"

"Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be attended on by a
novice. What ten? It's when a mendicant is ethical ... They're learned
... Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well
analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and
accompanying material. They're able to care for the sick or get someone
else to do so. They're able to settle dissatisfaction or get someone
else to do so. They're able to dispel remorse when it has come up.
They're able to rationally dissuade someone from misconceptions that
come up. They're able to encourage someone in the higher ethics, the
higher mind, and the higher wisdom. A mendicant should have these ten
qualities to be attended on by a novice."

</article>
<article id="an10.37">

#### [AN 10.37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Schism in the Saṅgha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁghabhedasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, they speak of 'schism in the Saṅgha'. How is schism in the Saṅgha
defined?"

"Upāli, it's when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the
teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain
what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as
not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the
Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as
practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized
One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not
prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and
what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the
Realized One. On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way.
They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code
autonomously. That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined."

</article>
<article id="an10.38">

#### [AN 10.38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Harmony in the Saṅgha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁghasāmaggīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, they speak of 'harmony in the Saṅgha'. How is harmony in the
Saṅgha defined?"

"Upāli, it's when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not
the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain
what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training
as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the
Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as
not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the
Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not
prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One,
and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the
Realized One. On these ten grounds they don't split off and go their own
way. They don't perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic
code autonomously. That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined."

</article>
<article id="an10.39">

#### [AN 10.39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'schism in the Saṅgha'. How is schism in the Saṅgha
defined?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the
teaching ... and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not
prescribed by the Realized One. On these ten grounds they split off and
go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the
monastic code autonomously. That is how schism in the Saṅgha is
defined."

"But sir, what does someone who has split a harmonious Saṅgha bring upon
themselves?"

"They bring upon themselves evil that lasts for an eon."

"But sir, what is the evil that lasts for an eon?"

"They burn in hell for an eon, Ānanda.

> A schismatic remains for the eon\
> in a place of loss, in hell.\
> Taking a stand against the teaching,\
> favoring factions, they ruin their sanctuary.\
> After causing schism in a harmonious Saṅgha,\
> they burn in hell for an eon."

</article>
<article id="an10.40">

#### [AN 10.40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, they speak of 'harmony in the Saṅgha'. How is harmony in the
Saṅgha defined?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not
the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain
what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training
as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the
Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as
not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the
Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not
prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One,
and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the
Realized One. On these ten grounds they don't split off and go their own
way. They don't perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic
code autonomously. That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined."

"But sir, what does someone who has created harmony in a schismatic
Saṅgha bring upon themselves?"

"They bring divine merit upon themselves."

"But what is divine merit?"

"They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.

> A Saṅgha in harmony is happy,\
> as is support for those in harmony.\
> Taking a stand on the teaching,\
> favoring harmony, they ruin no sanctuary.\
> After creating harmony in the Saṅgha,\
> they rejoice in heaven for an eon."

</article>

[]{#an10-akkosavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Abuse {#an10-akkosavagga.xhtml_an10-akkosavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.41">

#### [AN 10.41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Arguments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vivādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason, why arguments, quarrels,
and disputes arise in the Saṅgha, and the mendicants don't live
happily?"

"Upāli, it's when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the
teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain
what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as
not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the
Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as
practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized
One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not
prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and
what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the
Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why arguments,
quarrels, and disputes arise in the Saṅgha, and the mendicants don't
live happily."

</article>
<article id="an10.42">

#### [AN 10.42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Roots of Arguments (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavivādamūlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many roots of arguments are there?"

"Upāli, there are ten roots of arguments. What ten? It's when a
mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is
the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training
as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They
explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and
stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the
Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain
what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized
One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the
Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One
as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the
Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. These are the ten
roots of arguments."

</article>
<article id="an10.43">

#### [AN 10.43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Roots of Arguments (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavivādamūlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Sir, how many roots of arguments are there?"

"Upāli, there are ten roots of arguments. What ten? It's when a
mendicant explains what is not an offense as an offense, and what is an
offense as not an offense. They explain a light offense as a serious
offense, and a serious offense as a light offense. They explain an
offense committed with corrupt intention as an offense not committed
with corrupt intention, and an offense not committed with corrupt
intention as an offense committed with corrupt intention. They explain
an offense requiring rehabilitation as an offense not requiring
rehabilitation, and an offense not requiring rehabilitation as an
offense requiring rehabilitation. They explain an offense with redress
as an offense without redress, and an offense without redress as an
offense with redress. These are the ten roots of arguments."

</article>
<article id="an10.44">

#### [AN 10.44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Kusinārā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kusinārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kusinārā, in the Forest of
Offerings. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant who wants to accuse another should first check
five things in themselves and establish five things in themselves. What
five things should they check in themselves? A mendicant who wants to
accuse another should check this: 'Is my bodily behavior pure? Do I have
pure bodily behavior that is impeccable and irreproachable? Is this
thing found in me or not?' If it's not, there will be people who say:
'Come on, venerable, train your own bodily behavior first.'

Furthermore, a mendicant who wants to accuse another should check this:
'Is my verbal behavior pure? Do I have pure verbal behavior that is
impeccable and irreproachable? Is this thing found in me or not?' If
it's not, there will be people who say: 'Come on, venerable, train your
own verbal behavior first.'

Furthermore, a mendicant who wants to accuse another should check this:
'Is my heart established in love for my spiritual companions, without
resentment? Is this thing found in me or not?' If it's not, there will
be people who say: 'Come on, venerable, establish your heart in love for
your spiritual companions first.'

Furthermore, a mendicant who wants to accuse another should check this:
'Am I very learned, remembering and keeping what I've learned? These
teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. Am I very learned in such teachings, remembering
them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending
them theoretically? Is this thing found in me or not?' If it's not,
there will be people who say: 'Come on, venerable, memorize the
scriptures first.'

Furthermore, a mendicant who wants to accuse another should check this:
'Have both monastic codes been passed down to me in detail, well
analyzed, well mastered, and well evaluated in both the rules and
accompanying material? Is this thing found in me or not?' If it's not,
and if they are unable to respond when asked "Venerable, where was this
spoken by the Buddha?" there will be people who say: 'Come on,
venerable, train in the monastic code first.' These are the five things
they should check in themselves.

What five things should they establish in themselves? 'I will speak at
the right time, not at the wrong time. I will speak truthfully, not
falsely. I will speak gently, not harshly. I will speak beneficially,
not harmfully. I will speak lovingly, not from secret hate.' These are
the five things they should establish in themselves. A mendicant who
wants to accuse another should first check these five things in
themselves and establish these five things in themselves."

</article>
<article id="an10.45">

#### [AN 10.45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Entering a Royal Compound ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Rājantepurappavesanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten drawbacks to entering a royal compound. What
ten?

Firstly, a king is sitting with his chief queen when a monk enters. When
the queen sees the monk she smiles, or when the monk sees the queen he
smiles. So the king thinks: 'They've done it for sure, or they will do
it.' This is the first drawback of entering a royal compound.

Furthermore, a king has many duties, and much to do. He has sex with one
of the women but doesn't remember. She gets pregnant from that. So the
king thinks: 'No-one else has entered here, except for that monk. Could
this be the monk's doing?' This is the second drawback of entering a
royal compound.

Furthermore, a gem is lost somewhere in the royal compound. So the king
thinks: 'No-one else has entered here, except for that monk. Could this
be the monk's doing?' This is the third drawback of entering a royal
compound.

Furthermore, secret deliberations in the royal compound are leaked
outside. So the king thinks: 'No-one else has entered here, except for
that monk. Could this be the monk's doing?' This is the fourth drawback
of entering a royal compound.

Furthermore, in a royal compound, a father longs for their son, or a son
longs for his father. They think: 'No-one else has entered here, except
for that monk. Could this be the monk's doing?' This is the fifth
drawback of entering a royal compound.

Furthermore, the king promotes someone to a higher position. Those who
are upset by this think: 'The king is close to that monk. Could this be
the monk's doing?' This is the sixth drawback of entering a royal
compound.

Furthermore, the king demotes someone to a lower position. Those who are
upset by this think: 'The king is close to that monk. Could this be the
monk's doing?' This is the seventh drawback of entering a royal
compound.

Furthermore, the king dispatches the army at the wrong time. Those who
are upset by this think: 'The king is close to that monk. Could this be
the monk's doing?' This is the eighth drawback of entering a royal
compound.

Furthermore, the king dispatches the army at the right time, but orders
it to turn back while still on the road. Those who are upset by this
think: 'The king is close to that monk. Could this be the monk's doing?'
This is the ninth drawback of entering a royal compound.

Furthermore, in the royal compound there is a trampling of elephants,
horses, and chariots, as well as arousing sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, and touches that do not befit a monk. This is the tenth drawback
of entering a royal compound.

These are the ten drawbacks of entering a royal compound."

</article>
<article id="an10.46">

#### [AN 10.46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With the Sakyans ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then on the sabbath several
Sakyan lay followers went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to them:

"Sakyans, do you observe the sabbath with its eight factors?"

"Sir, sometimes we do, sometimes we don't."

"That's your loss, Sakyans, it's your misfortune. In this life with its
fear of sorrow and death, you sometimes keep the sabbath and you
sometimes don't.

What do you think, Sakyans? Take a man who earns half a dollar for an
honest day's work. Is this enough to call him a deft and industrious
man?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sakyans? Take a man who earns a dollar for an honest
day's work. Is this enough to call him a deft and industrious man?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sakyans? Take a man who, for an honest day's work,
earns two dollars ... three dollars ... four dollars ... five dollars
... six dollars ... seven dollars ... eight dollars ... nine dollars ...
ten dollars ... twenty dollars ... thirty dollars ... forty dollars ...
fifty dollars ... a hundred dollars. Is this enough to call him a deft
and industrious man?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sakyans? Suppose that man earned a hundred or a
thousand dollars every day and saved it all up. If he lived for a
hundred years, would he not accumulate a large mass of wealth?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Sakyans? Would that man, on account of that wealth,
experience perfect happiness for a single day or night, or even half a
day or night?"

"No, sir."

"Why is that?"

"Because sensual pleasures, sir, are impermanent, hollow, false, and
deceptive."

"But take one of my disciples who lives diligent, keen, and resolute for
ten years, practicing in line with my instructions. They can experience
perfect happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, or a hundred
thousand years. And they could become a once-returner or a non-returner,
or unfailingly a stream-enterer. Let alone ten years, take one of my
disciples who lives diligent, keen, and resolute for nine years ...
eight years ... seven years ... six years ... five years ... four years
... three years ... two years ... one year ... ten months ... nine
months ... eight months ... seven months ... six months ... five months
... four months ... three months ... two months ... one month ... a
fortnight ... ten days ... nine days ... eight days ... seven days ...
six days ... five days ... four days ... three days ... two days ...

Let alone two days, take one of my disciples who lives diligent, keen,
and resolute for one day, practicing in line with my instructions. They
can experience perfect happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand
years, or a hundred thousand years. And they could become a
once-returner or a non-returner, or unfailingly a stream-enterer. It's
your loss, Sakyans, it's your misfortune. In this life with its fear of
sorrow and death, you sometimes keep the sabbath and you sometimes
don't."

"Well, sir, from this day forth we will observe the sabbath with its
eight factors."

</article>
<article id="an10.47">

#### [AN 10.47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mahālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof. Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason for doing bad deeds, for
performing bad deeds?"

"Greed is a cause, Mahāli, greed is a reason for doing bad deeds, for
performing bad deeds. Hate is a cause of bad deeds ... Delusion is a
cause of bad deeds ... Irrational application of mind is a cause of bad
deeds ... A wrongly directed mind is a cause of bad deeds ... This is
the cause, Mahāli, this is the reason for doing bad deeds, for
performing bad deeds."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason for doing good deeds, for
performing good deeds?"

"Contentment is a cause, Mahāli, contentment is a reason for doing good
deeds, for performing good deeds. Love is a cause of good deeds ...
Understanding is a cause of good deeds ... Rational application of mind
is a cause of good deeds ... A rightly directed mind is a cause of good
deeds ... This is the cause, Mahāli, this is the reason for doing good
deeds, for performing good deeds. If these ten things were not found in
the world, we wouldn't see either unprincipled and immoral conduct, or
principled and moral conduct. But since these ten things are found in
the world, we see both unprincipled and immoral conduct, and principled
and moral conduct."

</article>
<article id="an10.48">

#### [AN 10.48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ten Regular Reflections for a Renunciate ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pabbajitaabhiṇhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, one who has gone forth should often review these ten
things. What ten?

One who has gone forth should often review this: 'I have secured freedom
from class.'

'My livelihood is tied up with others.'

'My behavior should be different.'

'I hope there's no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical
conduct?'

'I hope that, after examination, sensible spiritual companions don't
reproach any aspect of my ethics?'

'I must be parted and separated from all I hold dear and beloved.'

'I am the owner of my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my
relative, and my refuge.

I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do, whether good or bad.'

'As the days and nights flit by, what sort of person am I becoming?'

'Do I love to stay in empty huts?'

'Do I have any superhuman distinctions in knowledge and vision worthy of
the noble ones, so that when my spiritual companions question me on my
deathbed I will not be embarrassed?'

One who has gone forth should often review these ten things."

</article>
<article id="an10.49">

#### [AN 10.49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Existing Because of the Body ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sarīraṭṭhadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things exist because of the body. What ten? Cold,
heat, hunger, thirst, feces, urine, restraint of body, speech, and
livelihood, and the will to live that leads to future lives. These ten
things exist because of the body."

</article>
<article id="an10.50">

#### [AN 10.50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Arguments ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhaṇḍanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time, after the meal, on return
from almsround, several mendicants sat together in the assembly hall.
They were arguing, quarreling, and disputing, wounding each other with
barbed words.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now?
What conversation was left unfinished?"

"Sir, after the meal, on return from almsround, we sat together in the
assembly hall, arguing, quarreling, and disputing, wounding each other
with barbed words."

"Mendicants, this is not appropriate for you gentlemen who have gone
forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness.

There are ten warm-hearted qualities that make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. What
ten? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
When a mendicant is ethical, this warm-hearted quality makes for
fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity,
without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
...

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
...

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. When a mendicant is wise, this warm-hearted quality
makes for fondness and respect, helping the Saṅgha to live in harmony
and unity, without quarreling.

These ten warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling."

</article>

[]{#an10-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Second Fifty {#an10-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an10-dutiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Your Own Mind {#an10-dutiyapannasaka.xhtml_an10-sacittavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.51">

#### [AN 10.51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Your Own Mind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sacittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I
often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness
or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I
often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often
disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often
immersed in samādhi or not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, irritable, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad, unskillful
qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. Suppose your
clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. In the same way, in order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, free of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice
meditation further to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an10.52">

#### [AN 10.52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sāriputta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāriputtasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!'

In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant's skillful
qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am
I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often
restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or
not? Am I often defiled in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or
not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in samādhi or
not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, angry, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad, unskillful
qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. Suppose your
clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. In the same way, in order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice
meditation further to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an10.53">

#### [AN 10.53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Stagnation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ṭhitisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I don't praise stagnation in skillful qualities, let alone
decline. I praise growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
decline.

And how is there decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
growth? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor
grow in them. I call this decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation
or growth. This is how there's decline in skillful qualities, not
stagnation or growth.

And how is there stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline or
growth? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither decline nor
grow in them. I call this stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline
or growth. This is how there's stagnation in skillful qualities, not
decline or growth.

And how is there growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
decline? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor
decline in them. I call this growth in skillful qualities, not
stagnation or decline. This is how there's growth in skillful qualities,
not stagnation or decline.

If a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind, then they
should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I
often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness
or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I
often irritable or not? Am I often defiled in mind or not? Am I often
disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often
immersed in samādhi or not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, irritable, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad, unskillful
qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. Suppose your
clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. In the same way, in order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice
meditation further to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an10.54">

#### [AN 10.54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Serenity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samathasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Do I have internal serenity of heart
or not? Do I have the higher wisdom of discernment of principles or
not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have serenity
but not discernment.' Grounded on serenity, they should practice
meditation to get discernment. After some time they have both serenity
and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have
discernment but not serenity.' Grounded on discernment, they should
practice meditation to get serenity. After some time they have both
serenity and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have neither
serenity nor discernment.' In order to get those skillful qualities,
they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head
were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm,
effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational
awareness. In the same way, in order to get those skillful qualities,
that person should apply intense enthusiasm ... After some time they
have both serenity and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have both
serenity and discernment.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they
should practice meditation further to end the defilements.

I say that there are two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear. I say that there are two kinds of almsfood:
that which you should eat, and that which you shouldn't eat. I say that
there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent. I say that there are two kinds of village or town:
those you should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent. I say that
there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent. I say that there are two kinds of people: those you
should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.

'I say that there are two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Well, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this robe, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not wear
that kind of robe. Whereas, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this
robe, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You
should wear that kind of robe. 'I say that there are two kinds of robes:
those you should wear, and those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat,
and that which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of almsfood: 'When I eat this almsfood,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not eat that kind of almsfood. Whereas, should you know of almsfood:
'When I eat this almsfood, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should eat that kind of almsfood. 'I say that there
are two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat, and that which you
shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of lodging. Whereas, should you know of a
lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of lodging.
'I say that there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? Well, should you know of a village or town: 'When I
frequent this village or town, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful
qualities decline.' You should not frequent that kind of village or
town. Whereas, should you know of a village or town: 'When I frequent
this village or town, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of village or town. 'I
say that there are two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a country: 'When I frequent this country,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of country. Whereas, should you know of a
country: 'When I frequent this country, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of country.
'I say that there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of people: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a person: 'When I frequent this person,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of person. Whereas, should you know of a person:
'When I frequent this person, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of person. 'I say that
there are two kinds of people: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.55">

#### [AN 10.55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parihānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, they speak of a person liable to decline, and one not liable
to decline. But how did the Buddha define a person liable to decline,
and one not liable to decline?"

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May Venerable
Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"How did the Buddha define a person liable to decline? It's when a
mendicant doesn't get to hear a teaching they haven't heard before. They
forget those teachings they have heard. They don't keep exercising the
teachings with which they are already familiar. And they don't come to
understand what they haven't understood before. That's how the Buddha
defined a person liable to decline.

And how did the Buddha define a person not liable to decline? It's when
a mendicant gets to hear a teaching they haven't heard before. They
remember those teachings they have heard. They keep exercising the
teachings with which they are already familiar. And they come to
understand what they haven't understood before. That's how the Buddha
defined a person not liable to decline.

If a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind, then they
should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!'

In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant's skillful
qualities. 'Is contentment often found in me or not? Is kind-heartedness
often found in me or not? Is freedom from dullness and drowsiness often
found in me or not? Is calm often found in me or not? Is confidence
often found in me or not? Is love often found in me or not? Is purity of
mind often found in me or not? Is internal joy with the teaching found
in me or not? Is internal serenity of heart found in me or not? Is the
higher wisdom of discernment of principles found in me or not?'

Suppose a mendicant, while checking, doesn't see any of these skillful
qualities in themselves. In order to get them they should apply intense
enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, they should apply intense enthusiasm to get those skillful
qualities ...

Suppose a mendicant, while checking, sees some of these skillful
qualities in themselves, but doesn't see others. Grounded on the
skillful qualities they see, they should apply intense enthusiasm,
effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational
awareness in order to get the skillful qualities they don't see. Suppose
your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd
apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, grounded on the
skillful qualities they see, they should apply intense enthusiasm to get
those skillful qualities they don't see.

But suppose a mendicant, while checking, sees all of these skillful
qualities in themselves. Grounded on all these skillful qualities they
should practice meditation further to end the defilements."

</article>
<article id="an10.56">

#### [AN 10.56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What ten? The perceptions of ugliness, death,
repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world,
impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering,
giving up, fading away, and cessation. These ten perceptions, when
developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They
culminate in freedom from death and end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an10.57">

#### [AN 10.57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What ten? The perceptions of impermanence,
not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole
world, a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open
corpse, and a bloated corpse. These ten perceptions, when developed and
cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom
from death and end in freedom from death."

</article>
<article id="an10.58">

#### [AN 10.58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Rooted ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mūlakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their
culmination? What is their final end?' How would you answer them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their
culmination? What is their final end?' You should answer them:
'Reverends, all things are rooted in desire. They are produced by
application of mind. Contact is their origin. Feeling is their meeting
place. Immersion is their chief. Mindfulness is their ruler. Wisdom is
their overseer. Freedom is their core. They culminate in freedom from
death. And extinguishment is their final end.' When questioned by
wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer them."

</article>
<article id="an10.59">

#### [AN 10.59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Going Forth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pabbajjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"So you should train like this: 'Our minds will be consolidated as they
were when we went forth, and arisen bad unskillful qualities will not
occupy our minds. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of
impermanence, not-self, ugliness, and drawbacks. Knowing what is fair
and unfair in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that
perception. Knowing continued existence and ending of existence in the
world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing the
origination and ending of the world, our minds will be consolidated in
that perception. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of
giving up, fading away, and cessation.' That's how you should train.

When your minds are consolidated in these ten perceptions, you can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if
there's something left over, non-return."

</article>
<article id="an10.60">

#### [AN 10.60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Girimānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Girimānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time Venerable Girimānanda was
sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Girimānanda is sick, suffering, gravely ill. Sir, please
go to Venerable Girimānanda out of sympathy."

"Ānanda, if you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda these ten
perceptions, it's possible that after hearing them his illness will die
down on the spot.

What ten? The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness,
drawbacks, giving up, fading away, cessation, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence of all conditions, and mindfulness of
breathing.

And what is the perception of impermanence? It's when a mendicant has
gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are impermanent.' And so they meditate observing
impermanence in the five grasping aggregates. This is called the
perception of impermanence.

And what is the perception of not-self? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'The eye and sights, ear and sounds, nose and
smells, tongue and tastes, body and touches, and mind and ideas are
not-self.' And so they meditate observing not-self in the six interior
and exterior sense fields. This is called the perception of not-self.

And what is the perception of ugliness? It's when a mendicant examines
their own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of
the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth. 'In this
body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews,
bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs,
intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood,
sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' And so
they meditate observing ugliness in this body. This is called the
perception of ugliness.

And what is the perception of drawbacks? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This body has much suffering and many drawbacks.
For this body is beset with many kinds of affliction, such as the
following. Diseases of the eye, inner ear, nose, tongue, body, head,
outer ear, mouth, teeth, and lips. Cough, asthma, catarrh, inflammation,
fever, stomach ache, fainting, dysentery, gastric pain, cholera,
leprosy, boils, eczema, tuberculosis, epilepsy, herpes, itch, scabs,
smallpox, scabies, hemorrhage, diabetes, piles, pimples, and ulcers.
Afflictions stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their
conjunction. Afflictions caused by change in weather, by not taking care
of yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past deeds. Cold,
heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, and urination.' And so they meditate
observing drawbacks in this body. This is called the perception of
drawbacks.

And what is the perception of giving up? It's when a mendicant doesn't
tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen, and
they don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but
give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This
is called the perception of giving up.

And what is the perception of fading away? It's when a mendicant has
gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the
stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, extinguishment.' This is called the
perception of fading away.

And what is the perception of cessation? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the
stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, cessation, extinguishment.' This is called the
perception of cessation.

And what is the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world? It's
when a mendicant lives giving up and not grasping on to the attraction
and grasping to the world, the mental fixation, insistence, and
underlying tendencies. This is called the perception of dissatisfaction
with the whole world.

And what is the perception of the impermanence of all conditions? It's
when a mendicant is horrified, repelled, and disgusted with all
conditions. This is called the perception of the impermanence of all
conditions.

And what is mindfulness of breathing? It's when a mendicant has gone to
a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down
cross-legged, sets their body straight, and establishes mindfulness in
their presence. Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe
out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.'
Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When
breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing
out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole body.'They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical process.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the physical process.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing bliss.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing bliss.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing mental processes.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing mental processes.'They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.'They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in gladdening the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out gladdening the mind.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe
out observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting go.' This is called mindfulness of breathing.

If you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda these ten
perceptions, it's possible that after hearing them his illness will die
down on the spot."

Then Ānanda, having learned these ten perceptions from the Buddha
himself, went to Girimānanda and recited them. Then after Girimānanda
heard these ten perceptions his illness died down on the spot. And
that's how he recovered from that illness.

</article>

[]{#an10-yamakavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Pairs {#an10-yamakavagga.xhtml_an10-yamakavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.61">

#### [AN 10.61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ignorance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avijjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is said that no first point of ignorance is evident,
before which there was no ignorance, and afterwards it came to be. And
yet it is evident that there is a specific condition for ignorance.

I say that ignorance is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And what
is the fuel for ignorance? You should say: 'The five hindrances.' I say
that the five hindrances are fueled by something, they're not unfueled.
And what is the fuel for the five hindrances? You should say: 'The three
kinds of misconduct.' I say that the three kinds of misconduct are
fueled by something, they're not unfueled. And what is the fuel for the
three kinds of misconduct? You should say: 'Lack of sense restraint.' I
say that lack of sense restraint is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for lack of sense restraint? You should
say: 'Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness.' I say that lack of
mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for lack of mindfulness and situational
awareness? You should say: 'Irrational application of mind.' I say that
irrational application of mind is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for irrational application of mind? You
should say: 'Lack of faith.' I say that lack of faith is fueled by
something, it's not unfueled. And what is the fuel for lack of faith?
You should say: 'Listening to an untrue teaching.' I say that listening
to an untrue teaching is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And
what is the fuel for listening to an untrue teaching? You should say:
'Associating with untrue persons.'

In this way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching.
When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of lack of faith ... irrational application of mind
... lack of mindfulness and situational awareness ... lack of sense
restraint ...the three kinds of misconduct ... the five hindrances. When
the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. That's the
fuel for ignorance, and that's how it's fulfilled.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. That's the fuel for the
ocean, and that's how it's filled up.

In the same way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching.
When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of lack of faith ... irrational application of mind
... lack of mindfulness and situational awareness ... lack of sense
restraint ...the three kinds of misconduct ... the five hindrances. When
the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. That's the
fuel for ignorance, and that's how it's fulfilled.

I say that knowledge and freedom are fueled by something, they're not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for knowledge and freedom? You should
say: 'The seven awakening factors.' I say that the seven awakening
factors are fueled by something, they're not unfueled. And what is the
fuel for the seven awakening factors? You should say: 'The four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.' I say that the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation are fueled by something, they're not unfueled. And what is
the fuel for the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? You should say:
'The three kinds of good conduct.' I say that the three kinds of good
conduct are fueled by something, they're not unfueled. And what is the
fuel for the three kinds of good conduct? You should say: 'Sense
restraint.' I say that sense restraint is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for sense restraint? You should say:
'Mindfulness and situational awareness.' I say that mindfulness and
situational awareness is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And
what is the fuel for mindfulness and situational awareness? You should
say: 'Rational application of mind.' I say that rational application of
mind is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And what is the fuel for
rational application of mind? You should say: 'Faith.' I say that faith
is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And what is the fuel for
faith? You should say: 'Listening to the true teaching.' I say that
listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for listening to the true teaching? You
should say: 'Associating with true persons.'

In this way, when the factor of associating with true persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching.
When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of faith ... rational application of mind ...
mindfulness and situational awareness ... sense restraint ...the three
kinds of good conduct ... the four kinds of mindfulness meditation ...
the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are
fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. That's the fuel for
knowledge and freedom, and that's how it's fulfilled.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. That's the fuel for the
ocean, and that's how it's filled up.

In the same way, when the factor of associating with true persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching.
When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of faith ... rational application of mind ...
mindfulness and situational awareness ... sense restraint ...the three
kinds of good conduct ... the four kinds of mindfulness meditation ...
the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are
fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. That's the fuel for
knowledge and freedom, and that's how it's fulfilled."

</article>
<article id="an10.62">

#### [AN 10.62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, it is said that no first point of craving for continued
existence is evident, before which there was no craving for continued
existence, and afterwards it came to be. And yet it is evident that
there is a specific condition for craving for continued existence.

I say that craving for continued existence is fueled by something, it's
not unfueled. And what is the fuel for craving for continued existence?
You should say: 'Ignorance.'

I say that ignorance is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And what
is the fuel for ignorance? You should say: 'The five hindrances.'

I say that the five hindrances are fueled by something, they're not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for the five hindrances? You should say:
'The three kinds of misconduct.'

I say that the three kinds of misconduct are fueled by something,
they're not unfueled. And what is the fuel for the three kinds of
misconduct? You should say: 'Lack of sense restraint.'

I say that lack of sense restraint is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for lack of sense restraint? You should
say: 'Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness.'

I say that lack of mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by
something, it's not unfueled. And what is the fuel for lack of
mindfulness and situational awareness? You should say: 'Irrational
application of mind.'

I say that irrational application of mind is fueled by something, it's
not unfueled. And what is the fuel for irrational application of mind?
You should say: 'Lack of faith.'

I say that lack of faith is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And
what is the fuel for lack of faith? You should say: 'Listening to an
untrue teaching.'

I say that listening to an untrue teaching is fueled by something, it's
not unfueled. And what is the fuel for listening to an untrue teaching?
You should say: 'Associating with untrue persons.'

In this way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching.
When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of lack of faith ... irrational application of mind
... lack of mindfulness and situational awareness ... lack of sense
restraint ...the three kinds of misconduct ... the five hindrances ...
ignorance. When ignorance is fulfilled, it fulfills craving for
continued existence. That's the fuel for craving for continued
existence, and that's how it's fulfilled.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. That's the fuel for the
ocean, and that's how it's filled up.

In the same way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching.
When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of lack of faith ... irrational application of mind
... lack of mindfulness and situational awareness ... lack of sense
restraint ...the three kinds of misconduct ... the five hindrances ...
ignorance. When ignorance is fulfilled, it fulfills craving for
continued existence. That's the fuel for craving for continued
existence, and that's how it's fulfilled.

I say that knowledge and freedom are fueled by something, they're not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for knowledge and freedom? You should
say: 'The seven awakening factors.'

I say that the seven awakening factors are fueled by something, they're
not unfueled. And what is the fuel for the seven awakening factors? You
should say: 'The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.'

I say that the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are fueled by
something, they're not unfueled. And what is the fuel for the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation? You should say: 'The three kinds of good
conduct.'

I say that the three kinds of good conduct are fueled by something,
they're not unfueled. And what is the fuel for the three kinds of good
conduct? You should say: 'Sense restraint.'

I say that sense restraint is fueled by something, it's not unfueled.
And what is the fuel for sense restraint? You should say: 'Mindfulness
and situational awareness.'

I say that mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something,
it's not unfueled. And what is the fuel for mindfulness and situational
awareness? You should say: 'Rational application of mind.'

I say that rational application of mind is fueled by something, it's not
unfueled. And what is the fuel for rational application of mind? You
should say: 'Faith.'

I say that faith is fueled by something, it's not unfueled. And what is
the fuel for faith? You should say: 'Listening to the true teaching.'

I say that listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it's
not unfueled. And what is the fuel for listening to the true teaching?
You should say: 'Associating with true persons.'

In this way, when the factor of associating with true persons is
fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching.
When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it
fulfills the factor of faith ... rational application of mind ...
mindfulness and situational awareness ... sense restraint ...the three
kinds of good conduct ... the four kinds of mindfulness meditation ...
the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are
fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. That's the fuel for
knowledge and freedom, and that's how it's fulfilled.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. That's the fuel for the
ocean, and that's how it's filled up. In this way, when the factor of
associating with true persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of
listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true
teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith ... rational
application of mind ... mindfulness and situational awareness ... sense
restraint ...the three kinds of good conduct ... the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation ... the seven awakening factors. When the seven
awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom.
That's the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that's how it's
fulfilled."

</article>
<article id="an10.63">

#### [AN 10.63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Come to a Conclusion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Niṭṭhaṅgatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, all those who have come to a conclusion about me are
accomplished in view. Of those who are accomplished in view, five
conclude their path in this realm, and five conclude their path after
leaving this realm behind. Which five conclude their path in this realm?
The one who has seven rebirths at most, the one who goes from family to
family, the one-seeder, the once returner, and the one who is perfected
in the present life. These five conclude their path in this realm. Which
five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind? The one who is
extinguished between one life and the next, the one who is extinguished
upon landing, the one who is extinguished without extra effort, the one
who is extinguished with extra effort, and the one who heads upstream,
going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. These five conclude their path after
leaving this realm behind. All those who have come to a conclusion about
me are accomplished in view. Of those who are accomplished in view,
these five conclude their path in this realm, and these five conclude
their path after leaving this realm behind."

</article>
<article id="an10.64">

#### [AN 10.64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Experiential Confidence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aveccappasannasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, all those who have experiential confidence in me have
entered the stream. Of those who have entered the stream, five conclude
their path in this realm, and five conclude their path after leaving
this realm behind. Which five conclude their path in this realm? The one
who has seven rebirths at most, the one who goes from family to family,
the one-seeder, the once returner, and the one who is perfected in the
present life. These five conclude their path in this realm. Which five
conclude their path after leaving this realm behind? The one who is
extinguished between one life and the next, the one who is extinguished
upon landing, the one who is extinguished without extra effort, the one
who is extinguished with extra effort, and the one who heads upstream,
going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. These five conclude their path after
leaving this realm behind. All those who have experiential confidence in
me have entered the stream. Of those who have entered the stream, these
five conclude their path in this realm, and these five conclude their
path after leaving this realm behind."

</article>
<article id="an10.65">

#### [AN 10.65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Happiness (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasukhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the land of the Magadhans
near the little village of Nālaka. Then the wanderer Sāmaṇḍakāni went up
to Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, Sāmaṇḍakāni sat down to one
side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, what is happiness and what is suffering?"

"Rebirth is suffering, reverend, no rebirth is happiness. When there is
rebirth, you can expect this kind of suffering. Cold, heat, hunger,
thirst, defecation, and urination. Contact with fire, clubs, and knives.
And relatives and friends get together and annoy you. When there is
rebirth, this is the kind of suffering you can expect. When there is no
rebirth, you can expect this kind of happiness. No cold, heat, hunger,
thirst, defecation, or urination. No contact with fire, clubs, or
knives. And relatives and friends don't get together and annoy you. When
there is no rebirth, this is the kind of happiness you can expect."

</article>
<article id="an10.66">

#### [AN 10.66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Happiness (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasukhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the land of the Magadhans
near the little village of Nālaka. Then the wanderer Sāmaṇḍakāni went up
to Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, Sāmaṇḍakāni sat down to one
side and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, in this teaching and training, what is happiness
and what is suffering?"

"Reverend, in this teaching and training dissatisfaction is suffering
and satisfaction is happiness. When you're dissatisfied, you can expect
this kind of suffering. You find no happiness or pleasure while walking
... standing ... sitting ... or lying down ... or when in a village ...
a wilderness ... at the root of a tree ... an empty hut ... the open air
... or when among the mendicants. When you're dissatisfied, this is the
kind of suffering you can expect.

When you're satisfied, you can expect this kind of happiness. You find
happiness or pleasure while walking ... standing ... sitting ... or
lying down ... or when in a village ... a wilderness ... at the root of
a tree ... an empty hut ... the open air ... or when among the
mendicants. When you're satisfied, this is the kind of happiness you can
expect."

</article>
<article id="an10.67">

#### [AN 10.67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Naḷakapāna (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanaḷakapānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a town of
the Kosalans named Naḷakapāna. There the Buddha stayed near Naḷakapāna
in the grove of flame-of-the-forest trees. Now, at that time it was the
sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by a Saṅgha of monks. The
Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and
inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk. Then he looked around the
Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed Venerable
Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, the Saṅgha of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness.
Give them some Dhamma talk as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll
stretch it."

"Yes, sir," Sāriputta replied.

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.
There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. It's like the
moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty,
roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only decline. In the
same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom
when it comes to skillful qualities can expect decline, not growth, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

A faithless individual is in decline. An individual with no conscience
is in decline. An imprudent individual is in decline. A lazy individual
is in decline. A witless individual is in decline. An irritable
individual is in decline. An acrimonious individual is in decline. An
individual with corrupt wishes is in decline. An individual with bad
friends is in decline. An individual with wrong view is in decline.

Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it
comes to skillful qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night. It's like the moon in the waxing
fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and
diameter and circumference only grow. In the same way, whoever has
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to
skillful qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night.

A faithful individual doesn't decline. An individual with a conscience
doesn't decline. A prudent individual doesn't decline. An energetic
individual doesn't decline. A wise individual doesn't decline. A loving
individual doesn't decline. A kind individual doesn't decline. An
individual with few desires doesn't decline. An individual with good
friends doesn't decline. An individual with right view doesn't decline."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Sāriputta:

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities can expect
decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.
It's like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night,
its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only
decline. In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities can expect
decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

A faithless individual is in decline. An individual with no conscience
... imprudent ... lazy ... witless ... irritable ... acrimonious ...
with corrupt wishes ... bad friends ... An individual with wrong view is
in decline.

Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it
comes to skillful qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night. It's like the moon in the waxing
fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and
diameter and circumference only grow. In the same way, whoever has
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom when it comes to
skillful qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night.

A faithful individual doesn't decline. A conscientious individual ...
prudent ... energetic ... wise ... loving ... kind ... with few desires
... good friends ... An individual with right view doesn't decline."

</article>
<article id="an10.68">

#### [AN 10.68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At Naḷakapāna (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanaḷakapānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha stayed near Naḷakapāna in the grove of
flame-of-the-forest trees.

Now, at that time it was the sabbath, and the Buddha was sitting
surrounded by a Saṅgha of monks. The Buddha spent much of the night
educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a
Dhamma talk. Then he looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so
very silent. He addressed Venerable Sāriputta, "Sāriputta, the Saṅgha of
mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness. Give them some Dhamma talk
as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll stretch it."

"Yes, sir," Sāriputta replied.

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom; who doesn't want to listen, doesn't memorize the teachings,
examine their meaning, or practice accordingly, and is not diligent when
it comes to skillful qualities can expect decline, not growth, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. It's like the moon in
the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty, roundness,
light, and diameter and circumference only decline. In the same way,
whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom; who
doesn't want to listen, doesn't memorize the teachings, examine their
meaning, or practice accordingly, and is negligent when it comes to
skillful qualities can expect decline, not growth, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night.

Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom; who wants
to listen, memorizes the teachings, examines their meaning, and
practices accordingly, and is diligent when it comes to skillful
qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether
by day or by night. It's like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether
by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and
circumference only grow. In the same way, whoever has faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom; who wants to listen, memorizes the
teachings, examines their meaning, and practices accordingly, and is
diligent when it comes to skillful qualities can expect growth, not
decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Sāriputta:

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom; who doesn't want to listen, doesn't memorize the
teachings, examine their meaning, or practice accordingly, and is
negligent when it comes to skillful qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. It's like the
moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night, its beauty,
roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only decline. In the
same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom; who doesn't want to listen, doesn't memorize the teachings,
examine their meaning, or practice accordingly, and is negligent when it
comes to skillful qualities can expect decline, not growth, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night.

Whoever has faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom; who wants
to listen, memorizes the teachings, examines their meaning, and
practices accordingly, and is diligent when it comes to skillful
qualities can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether
by day or by night. It's like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether
by day or by night, its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and
circumference only grow. In the same way, whoever has faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom; who wants to listen, memorizes the
teachings, examines their meaning, and practices accordingly, and is
diligent when it comes to skillful qualities can expect growth, not
decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

</article>
<article id="an10.69">

#### [AN 10.69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Topics of Discussion (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamakathāvatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time, after the meal, on return
from almsround, several mendicants sat together in the assembly hall.
They engaged in all kinds of low talk, such as talk about kings,
bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about
food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk
about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk
about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the
departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being
reborn in this or that place.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now?
What conversation was left unfinished?"

And they told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, it is not appropriate for you gentlemen who have gone forth
out of faith from the lay life to homelessness to engage in these kinds
of low talk.

There are, mendicants, these ten topics of discussion. What ten? Talk
about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing
energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. These are the ten topics of discussion.

Mendicants, if you bring up these topics of conversation again and again
then your glory could surpass even the sun and moon, so mighty and
powerful, let alone the wanderers of other religions."

</article>
<article id="an10.70">

#### [AN 10.70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Topics of Discussion (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyakathāvatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several
mendicants sat together in the assembly hall. They engaged in all kinds
of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers; talk
about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and
beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles,
villages, towns, cities, and nations; talk about women and heroes;
street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; miscellaneous talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that
place.

"Mendicants, there are ten grounds for praise. What ten? It's when a
mendicant personally has few wishes, and speaks to the mendicants on
having few wishes. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally is content, and speaks to the mendicants on
contentment. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally is secluded, and speaks to the mendicants on
seclusion. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally doesn't mix closely with others, and speaks to
the mendicants on not mixing closely with others. This is a ground for
praise.

A mendicant personally is energetic, and speaks to the mendicants on
rousing energy. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally is accomplished in ethics, and speaks to the
mendicants on being accomplished in ethics. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally is accomplished in immersion, and speaks to the
mendicants on being accomplished in immersion. This is a ground for
praise.

A mendicant personally is accomplished in wisdom, and speaks to the
mendicants on being accomplished in wisdom. This is a ground for praise.

A mendicant personally is accomplished in freedom, and speaks to the
mendicants on being accomplished in freedom. This is a ground for
praise.

A mendicant personally is accomplished in the knowledge and vision of
freedom, and speaks to the mendicants on being accomplished in the
knowledge and vision of freedom. This is a ground for praise.

These are the ten grounds for praise."

</article>

[]{#an10-akankhavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on If You Want {#an10-akankhavagga.xhtml_an10-akankhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.71">

#### [AN 10.71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [One Might Wish ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ākaṅkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've undertaken.

A mendicant might wish: 'May I be liked and approved by my spiritual
companions, respected and admired.' So let them fulfill their precepts,
be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be
endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

A mendicant might wish: 'May I receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.' So let them fulfill their
precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect
absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

A mendicant might wish: 'May the services of those whose robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be
very fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their
precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'When deceased family and relatives who have
passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very
fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I be content with any kind of robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.' So let
them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst.
May I endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.
May I endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And may I put up with
physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over desire and discontent, and
may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having
mastered desire and discontent whenever they have arisen.' So let them
fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear
and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread
whenever they arise.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when I
want, without trouble or difficulty.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.' So let them
fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not
neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty
huts.

'Live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in
the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules
you've undertaken.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.72">

#### [AN 10.72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Thorns ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kaṇṭakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in
the hall with the peaked roof, together with several well-known senior
disciples. They included Venerables Cāla, Upacāla, Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha,
Kaṭa, Kaṭissaṅga, and other well-known senior disciples.

Now at that time several well-known Licchavis plunged deep into the
Great Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages,
they made a dreadful racket. Then those venerables thought:

"These several well-known Licchavis have plunged deep into the Great
Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages, they're
making a dreadful racket. But the Buddha has said that sound is a thorn
to absorption. Let's go to the Gosiṅga Sal Wood. There we can meditate
comfortably, free of noise and crowds." Then those venerables went to
the Gosiṅga Sal Wood, where they meditated comfortably, free of noise
and crowds.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, where are Cāla, Upacāla, Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha, Kaṭa, and
Kaṭissaṅga? Where have these senior disciples gone?"

And the mendicants told him what had happened.

"Good, good, mendicants! It's just as those great disciples have so
rightly explained. I have said that sound is a thorn to absorption.

Mendicants, there are these ten thorns. What ten? Relishing company is a
thorn for someone who loves seclusion. Focusing on the beautiful feature
of things is a thorn for someone pursuing the meditation on ugliness.
Seeing shows is a thorn to someone restraining the senses. Lingering in
the neighborhood of females is a thorn to celibacy. Sound is a thorn to
the first absorption. Placing the mind and keeping it connected are a
thorn to the second absorption. Rapture is a thorn to the third
absorption. Breathing is a thorn to the fourth absorption. Perception
and feeling are a thorn to the attainment of the cessation of perception
and feeling. Greed, hate, and delusion are thorns.

Mendicants, live free of thorns! Live rid of thorns! Mendicants, live
free of thorns and rid of thorns! The perfected ones live free of
thorns, rid of thorns, free and rid of thorns."

</article>
<article id="an10.73">

#### [AN 10.73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Likable ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Iṭṭhadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things are rare
in the world. What ten? Wealth, beauty, health, ethical conduct, the
spiritual life, friends, learning, wisdom, good qualities, and heaven
are likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things hinder the ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that
are rare in the world. Sloth and lack of initiative hinder wealth. Lack
of adornment and decoration hinder beauty. Unsuitable activity hinders
health. Bad friendship hinders ethical conduct. Lack of sense restraint
hinders the spiritual life. Dishonesty hinders friends. Not reciting
hinders learning. Not wanting to listen and ask questions hinders
wisdom. Lack of commitment and reviewing hinder good qualities. Wrong
practice hinders heaven. These ten things hinder the ten likable,
desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things nourish the ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that
are rare in the world. Application and initiative nourish wealth.
Adornment and decoration nourish beauty. Suitable activity nourishes
health. Good friendship nourishes ethical conduct. Sense restraint
nourishes the spiritual life. Honesty nourishes friends. Reciting
nourishes learning. Eagerness to listen and ask questions nourishes
wisdom. Commitment and reviewing nourish good qualities. Right practice
nourishes heaven. These ten things nourish the ten likable, desirable,
and agreeable things that are rare in the world."

</article>
<article id="an10.74">

#### [AN 10.74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Growth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vaḍḍhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking
on what is essential and excellent in this life. What ten? He grows in
fields and lands, money and grain, wives and children, in bondservants,
workers, and staff, and in livestock. And he grows in faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom. A noble disciple who grows in ten ways
grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life.

> Someone who grows in money and grain,\
> in wives, children, and livestock,\
> is wealthy, famous, and respected\
> by relatives and friends, and even by royals.
>
> When someone grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a good man such as he sees clearly,\
> and in the present life he grows in both ways."

</article>
<article id="an10.75">

#### [AN 10.75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Migasālā ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Migasālāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning
and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the laywoman
Migasālā, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then the laywoman
Migasālā went up to Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"Honorable Ānanda, how on earth are we supposed to understand the
teaching taught by the Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both
reborn in exactly the same place in the next life? My father Purāṇa was
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. When he passed away
the Buddha declared that, since he was a once-returner, he was reborn in
the host of joyful gods. But my uncle Isidatta was not celibate; he
lived content with his wife. When he passed away the Buddha also
declared that, since he was a once-returner, he was reborn in the host
of joyful gods.

How on earth are we supposed to understand the teaching taught by the
Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both reborn in exactly the
same place in the next life?"

"You're right, sister, but that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Ānanda, after receiving almsfood at Migasālā's home, rose from his
seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from almsround, Ānanda
went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had
happened.

"Ānanda, who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty,
with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals?

These ten people are found in the world. What ten? Take a certain person
who is unethical. And they don't truly understand the freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom where that unethical conduct ceases without
anything left over. And they've not listened or learned or comprehended
theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're
going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is unethical. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that unethical conduct
ceases without anything left over. And they have listened and learned
and comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher
place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is unethical, but truly understands the
freedom of heart ... and has listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom is better and finer
than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream of the teaching
carries them along. But who knows the difference between them except a
Realized One? So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass
judgment on people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves.
I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is ethical. But they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that ethical conduct
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is ethical. And they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that ethical conduct ceases
without anything left over. And they've listened and learned and
comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is very lustful. And they don't truly
understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that lust
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is very lustful. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that lust ceases without
anything left over. And they've listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place, not a lower.
They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is irritable. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that anger ceases
without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned or
comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their
body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a
higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is irritable. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that anger ceases without
anything left over. And they've listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place, not a lower.
They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is restless. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that restlessness
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is restless. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that restlessness ceases
without anything left over. And they've listened and learned and
comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case the person who is restless, but truly understands the
freedom of heart ... and has listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom is better and finer
than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream of the teaching
carries them along. But who knows the difference between them except a
Realized One? So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass
judgment on people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves.
I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty, with an
aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals? These
ten people are found in the world.

If Isidatta had achieved Purāṇa's level of ethical conduct, Purāṇa could
not have even known Isidatta's destination. And if Purāṇa had achieved
Isidatta's level of wisdom, Isidatta could not have even known Purāṇa's
destination. So both individuals were lacking in one respect."

</article>
<article id="an10.76">

#### [AN 10.76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Three Things ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tayodhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, if three things were not found, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha would not arise in the world,
and the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One would not
shine in the world. What three? Rebirth, old age, and death. If these
three things were not found, the Realized One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha would not arise in the world, and the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One would not shine in the world.
But since these three things are found, the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha arises in the world, and the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One shines in the world.

Without giving up three things you can't give up rebirth, old age, and
death. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. Without giving up these
three things you can't give up rebirth, old age, and death.

Without giving up three things you can't give up greed, hate, and
delusion. What three? Substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of
precepts and observances. Without giving up these three things you can't
give up greed, hate, and delusion.

Without giving up three things you can't give up substantialist view,
doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances. What three?
Irrational application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental
sluggishness. Without giving up these three things you can't give up
substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and
observances.

Without giving up three things you can't give up irrational application
of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. What three?
Unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered mind.
Without giving up these three things you can't give up irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.

Without giving up three things you can't give up unmindfulness, lack of
situational awareness, and scattered mind. What three? Not wanting to
see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones,
and a fault-finding mind. Without giving up these three things you can't
give up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered
mind.

Without giving up three things you can't give up not wanting to see the
noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. What three? Restlessness, lack of restraint, and
unethical conduct. Without giving up these three things you can't give
up not wanting to see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching
of the noble ones, and a fault-finding mind.

Without giving up three things you can't give up restlessness, lack of
restraint, and unethical conduct. What three? Faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. Without giving up these three things you
can't give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.

Without giving up three things you can't give up faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. What three? Disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. Without giving up these three things
you can't give up faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness.

Without giving up three things you can't give up disregard, being hard
to admonish, and having bad friends. What three? Lack of conscience,
imprudence, and negligence. Without giving up these three things you
can't give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.

Mendicants, someone who lacks conscience and prudence is negligent. When
you're negligent you can't give up disregard, being hard to admonish,
and having bad friends. When you've got bad friends you can't give up
faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness. When you're lazy you
can't give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.
When you're unethical you can't give up not wanting to see the noble
ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. When you've got a fault-finding mind you can't give
up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind.
When your mind is scattered you can't give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. When your mind is
sluggish you can't give up substantialist view, doubt, and
misapprehension of precepts and observances. When you have doubts you
can't give up greed, hate, and delusion. Without giving up greed, hate,
and delusion you can't give up rebirth, old age, and death.

After giving up three things you can give up rebirth, old age, and
death. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. After giving up these
three things you can give up rebirth, old age, and death.

After giving up three things you can give up greed, hate, and delusion.
What three? Substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts
and observances. After giving up these three things you can give up
greed, hate, and delusion.

After giving up three things you can give up substantialist view, doubt,
and misapprehension of precepts and observances. What three? Irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
After giving up these three things you can give up substantialist view,
doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances.

After giving up three things you can give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. What three?
Unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind.
After giving up these three things you can give up irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.

After giving up three things you can give up unmindfulness, lack of
situational awareness, and scattered mind. What three? Not wanting to
see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones,
and a fault-finding mind. After giving up these three things you can
give up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered
mind.

After giving up three things you can give up not wanting to see the
noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. What three? Restlessness, lack of restraint, and
unethical conduct. After giving up these three things you can give up
not wanting to see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of
the noble ones, and a fault-finding mind.

After giving up three things you can give up restlessness, lack of
restraint, and unethical conduct. What three? Faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. After giving up these three things you
can give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.

After giving up three things you can give up faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. What three? Disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. After giving up these three things you
can give up faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness.

After giving up three things you can give up disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. What three? Lack of conscience,
imprudence, and negligence. After giving up these three things you can
give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.

Mendicants, someone who has conscience and prudence is diligent. When
you're diligent you can give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and
having bad friends. When you've got good friends you can give up
faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness. When you're energetic you
can give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct. When
you're ethical you can give up not wanting to see the noble ones, not
wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a fault-finding
mind. When you don't have a fault-finding mind you can give up
unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind. When
your mind isn't scattered you can give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. When your mind
isn't sluggish you can give up substantialist view, doubt, and
misapprehension of precepts and observances. When you have no doubts you
can give up greed, hate, and delusion. After giving up greed, hate, and
delusion you can give up rebirth, old age, and death."

</article>
<article id="an10.77">

#### [AN 10.77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Crow ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a crow has ten bad qualities. What ten? They're rude and
impudent, gluttonous and voracious, cruel and pitiless, weak and
raucous, unmindful and acquisitive. A crow has these ten bad qualities.
In the same way, a bad mendicant has these ten bad qualities. What ten?
They're rude and impudent, gluttonous and voracious, cruel and pitiless,
weak and raucous, unmindful and acquisitive. A bad mendicant has these
ten bad qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.78">

#### [AN 10.78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Jains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nigaṇṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, Jain ascetics have ten bad qualities. What ten? They're
faithless and unethical, without conscience or prudence, and devoted to
untrue persons. They glorify themselves and put others down. They're
attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go.
They're deceptive, with corrupt wishes and bad friends. Jain ascetics
have these ten bad qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.79">

#### [AN 10.79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grounds for Resentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āghātavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten grounds for resentment. What ten? Thinking:
'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing
wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong by
someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love' ... 'They
will do wrong by someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ...
'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help
someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment. You get angry for no reason.
These are the ten grounds for resentment."

</article>
<article id="an10.80">

#### [AN 10.80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Getting Rid of Resentment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āghātapaṭivinayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these ten methods to get rid of resentment. What
ten? Thinking: 'They harmed me, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid
of resentment. Thinking: 'They are harming me ...' ... 'They will harm
me ...' ... 'They harmed someone I love ...' ... 'They are harming
someone I love ...' 'They will harm someone I love ...' ... They helped
someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ...
Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. And you don't get angry for no reason.
These are the ten ways of getting rid of resentment."

</article>

[]{#an10-theravagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Senior Mendicants {#an10-theravagga.xhtml_an10-theravagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.81">

#### [AN 10.81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Bāhuna ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vāhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the
Gaggarā Lotus Pond. Then Venerable Bāhuna went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, how many things has the Realized One escaped from, so that he
lives detached, liberated, his mind free of limits?"

"Bāhuna, the Realized One has escaped from ten things, so that he lives
detached, liberated, his mind free of limits. What ten? Form ... feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness ... rebirth ... old age ...
death ... suffering ... defilements ... Suppose there was a blue water
lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the
water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging
to it. In the same way, the Realized One has escaped from ten things, so
that he lives detached, liberated, his mind free of limits."

</article>
<article id="an10.82">

#### [AN 10.82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ānanda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ānandasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, it is quite impossible for a faithless mendicant to achieve
growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who is unethical ...

unlearned ...

hard to admonish ...

with bad friends ...

lazy ...

unmindful ...

lacking contentment ...

of corrupt wishes ...

of wrong view to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant with these ten qualities to
achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

It is quite possible for a faithful mendicant to achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

It is quite possible for a mendicant who is ethical ...

a learned memorizer ...

easy to admonish ...

with good friends ...

energetic ...

mindful ...

contented ...

of few desires ...

of right view to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training.

It is quite possible for a mendicant with these ten qualities to achieve
growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training."

</article>
<article id="an10.83">

#### [AN 10.83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Puṇṇiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puṇṇiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Puṇṇiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes the Realized
One feels inspired to teach, and other times not?"

"Puṇṇiya, when a mendicant has faith but doesn't approach, the Realized
One doesn't feel inspired to teach. But when a mendicant has faith and
approaches, the Realized One feels inspired to teach.

When a mendicant has faith and approaches, but doesn't pay homage ...
they pay homage, but don't ask questions ... they ask questions, but
don't actively listen ... they actively listen, but don't remember the
teaching they've heard ... they remember the teaching they've heard, but
don't reflect on the meaning of the teachings they've remembered ...
they reflect on the meaning of the teachings they've remembered, but,
not having understood the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly ... they practice accordingly, but they're not a good
speaker. Their voice is not polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't
express the meaning ... They're a good speaker, but they don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. The Realized
One doesn't feel inspired to teach.

But when a mendicant has faith, approaches, pays homage, asks questions,
actively listens, remembers the teachings, reflects on the meaning,
practices accordingly, has a good voice, and encourages their spiritual
companions, the Realized One feels inspired to teach. When someone has
these ten qualities, the Realized One feels totally inspired to teach."

</article>
<article id="an10.84">

#### [AN 10.84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Declaration ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byākaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:

"Take a mendicant who declares enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."' They're pursued,
pressed, and grilled by the Realized One, or by one of his disciples who
has the absorptions, and is skilled in attainments, in the minds of
others, and in the ways of another's mind. Grilled in this way they get
stuck or lose their way. They fall to ruin and disaster.

The Realized One or one of his disciples comprehends their mind and
investigates: 'Why does this venerable declare enlightenment, saying:

"I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'?"'

They understand:

'This venerable gets irritable, and often lives with a heart full of
anger. But being full of anger means decline in the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One.

This venerable is acrimonious ...

prone to disdain ...

contemptuous ...

jealous ...

stingy ...

devious ...

deceitful ...

This venerable has corrupt wishes, and often lives with a heart full of
desire. But being full of desire means decline in the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One.

When there is still more to be done, this venerable stopped half-way
after achieving some insignificant distinction. But stopping half-way
means decline in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized
One.'

It is quite impossible for a mendicant to achieve growth, improvement,
or maturity in this teaching and training without giving up these ten
qualities. It is quite possible for a mendicant to achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training after giving up
these ten qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.85">

#### [AN 10.85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Boaster ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Katthīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Mahācunda was staying in the land of the Cetīs at
Sahajāti. There he addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahācunda said this:

"Take a mendicant who boasts and brags about their achievements: 'I
enter and emerge from the first absorption, the second absorption, the
third absorption, and the fourth absorption. And I enter and emerge from
the dimensions of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness,
and neither perception nor non-perception. And I enter and emerge from
the cessation of perception and feeling.'

They're pursued, pressed, and grilled by the Realized One, or by one of
his disciples who has the absorptions, and is skilled in attainments, in
the minds of others, and in the ways of another's mind. Grilled in this
way they get stuck or lose their way. They fall to ruin and disaster.

The Realized One or one of his disciples comprehends their mind and
investigates: 'Why does this venerable boast and brag about their
achievements, saying, "I enter and emerge from the first absorption ...
and the cessation of perception and feeling."'

They understand, 'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been
broken, tainted, spotty, and marred. Their deeds and behavior are
inconsistent. This venerable is unethical, and unethical conduct means
decline in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.

This venerable is unfaithful, and lack of faith means decline ...

This venerable is unlearned and unpracticed, and lack of learning means
decline ...

This venerable is hard to admonish, and being hard to admonish means
decline ...

This venerable has bad friends, and bad friends mean decline ...

This venerable is lazy, and laziness means decline ...

This venerable is unmindful, and unmindfulness means decline ...

This venerable is deceptive, and deceitfulness means decline ...

This venerable is burdensome, and being burdensome means decline ...

This venerable is witless, and lack of wisdom means decline in the
teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.'

Suppose one friend was to say to another: 'My dear friend, when you need
money for some payment, just ask me and I'll give it.' Then when some
payment falls due, that friend says to their friend: 'I need some money,
my dear friend. Give me some.' They'd say: 'Well then, my dear friend,
dig here.' So they dig there, but don't find anything. They'd say: 'You
lied to me, my dear friend, you spoke hollow words when you told me to
dig here.' They'd say: 'My dear friend, I didn't lie or speak hollow
words. Well then, dig here.' So they dig there as well, but don't find
anything. They'd say: 'You lied to me, my dear friend, you spoke hollow
words when you said dig here.' They'd say: 'My dear friend, I didn't lie
or speak hollow words. Well then, dig here.' So they dig there as well,
but don't find anything. They'd say: 'You lied to me, my dear friend,
you spoke hollow words when you said dig here.' They'd say: 'My dear
friend, I didn't lie or speak hollow words. But I had gone mad, I was
out of my mind.'

In the same way, take a mendicant who boasts and brags about their
achievements: 'I enter and emerge from the first absorption ... and the
cessation of perception and feeling.'

They're pursued, pressed, and grilled by the Realized One, or by one of
his disciples ... Grilled in this way they get stuck or lose their way.
They fall to ruin and disaster.

The Realized One or one of his disciples comprehends their mind and
investigates: 'Why does this venerable boast and brag about their
achievements, saying, "I enter and emerge from the first absorption ...
and the cessation of perception and feeling."'

They understand, 'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been
broken, tainted, spotty, and marred. Their deeds and behavior are
inconsistent. This venerable is unethical, and unethical conduct means
decline in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.

This venerable is unfaithful ...

unlearned and unpracticed ...

hard to admonish ...

with bad friends ...

lazy ...

unmindful ...

deceptive ...

burdensome ...

This venerable is witless, and lack of wisdom means decline in the
teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.'

It is quite impossible for a mendicant to achieve growth, improvement,
or maturity in this teaching and training without giving up these ten
qualities. It is quite possible for a mendicant to achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training after giving up
these ten qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.86">

#### [AN 10.86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Overestimation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhimānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Mahākassapa was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. There he addressed the
mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākassapa said this:

"Take a mendicant who declares enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."' They're pursued,
pressed, and grilled by the Realized One, or by one of his disciples who
has the absorptions, and is skilled in attainments, in the minds of
others, and in the ways of another's mind. Grilled in this way they get
stuck or lose their way. They fall to ruin and disaster.

The Realized One or one of his disciples comprehends their mind and
investigates: 'Why does this venerable declare enlightenment, saying, "I
understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed,
what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this
place.'?"'

They understand, 'This venerable overestimates themselves and takes that
to be the truth. They perceive that they've attained what they haven't
attained, done what they haven't done, and achieved what they haven't
achieved. And they declare enlightenment out of overestimation:

"I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"'

The Realized One or one of his disciples comprehends their mind and
investigates: 'Why does this venerable overestimate themselves and take
that to be the truth? Why do they perceive that they've attained what
they haven't attained, done what they haven't done, and achieved what
they haven't achieved? And why do they declare enlightenment out of
overestimation:

"I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"'

They understand, 'This venerable is very learned, remembering and
keeping what they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased,
describing a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are
very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them,
mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically.
Therefore this venerable overestimates themselves and takes that to be
the truth. ...'

They understand, 'This venerable is covetous, and often lives with a
heart full covetousness. Being full of covetousness means decline in the
teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.

This venerable has ill will ...

dullness and drowsiness ...

restlessness ...

doubt ...

This venerable relishes work. They love it and like to relish it ...

This venerable relishes talk ...

sleep ...

company ...

When there is still more to be done, this venerable stopped half-way
after achieving some insignificant distinction. Stopping half-way means
decline in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.'

It is quite impossible for a mendicant to achieve growth, improvement,
or maturity in this teaching and training without giving up these ten
qualities. It is quite possible for a mendicant to achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training after giving up
these ten qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.87">

#### [AN 10.87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disciplinary Issues ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nappiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants concerning the mendicant
Kalandaka:

"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, a mendicant raises disciplinary issues and doesn't praise the
settlement of disciplinary issues. This quality doesn't conduce to
fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

Furthermore, a mendicant doesn't want to train, and doesn't praise
taking up the training. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant has corrupt wishes, and doesn't praise getting
rid of wishes. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is irritable, and doesn't praise getting rid of
anger. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant denigrates others, and doesn't praise getting
rid of denigration. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is devious, and doesn't praise getting rid of
deviousness. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is deceitful, and doesn't praise getting rid of
deceitfulness. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant doesn't pay attention to the teachings, and
doesn't praise attending to the teachings. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is not in retreat, and doesn't praise retreat.
...

Furthermore, a mendicant is inhospitable to their spiritual companions,
and doesn't praise hospitality. This quality doesn't conduce to
fondness, respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

Even though a mendicant such as this might wish: 'If only my spiritual
companions would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!' Still they
don't honor, respect, esteem, and venerate them. Why is that? Because
their sensible spiritual companions see that they haven't given up those
bad unskillful qualities.

Suppose a wild colt was to wish: 'If only the humans would put me in a
thoroughbred's place, feed me a thoroughbred's food, and give me a
thoroughbred's grooming.' Still the humans wouldn't put them in a
thoroughbred's place, feed them a thoroughbred's food, or give them a
thoroughbred's grooming. Why is that? Because sensible humans see that
they haven't given up their tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints. In the
same way, even though a mendicant such as this might wish: 'If only my
spiritual companions would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!'
Still they don't honor, respect, esteem, and venerate them. Why is that?
Because their sensible spiritual companions see that they haven't given
up those bad unskillful qualities.

Next, a mendicant doesn't raise disciplinary issues and praises the
settlement of disciplinary issues. This quality conduces to fondness,
respect, esteem, harmony, and unity.

Furthermore, a mendicant wants to train, and praises taking up the
training. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant has few desires, and praises getting rid of
desires. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is not irritable, and praises getting rid of
anger. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant doesn't denigrate others, and praises getting
rid of denigration. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't devious, and praises getting rid of
deviousness. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't deceitful, and praises getting rid of
deceitfulness. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant pays attention to the teachings, and praises
attending to the teachings. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is in retreat, and praises retreat. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is hospitable to their spiritual companions,
and praises hospitality. This quality conduces to fondness, respect,
esteem, harmony, and unity.

Even though a mendicant such as this might never wish: 'If only my
spiritual companions would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!'
Still they honor, respect, esteem, and venerate them. Why is that?
Because their sensible spiritual companions see that they've given up
those bad unskillful qualities.

Suppose a fine thoroughbred never wished: 'If only the humans would put
me in a thoroughbred's place, feed me a thoroughbred's food, and give me
a thoroughbred's grooming.' Still the humans would put them in a
thoroughbred's place, feed them a thoroughbred's food, and give them a
thoroughbred's grooming. Why is that? Because sensible humans see that
they've given up their tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints.

In the same way, even though a mendicant such as this might never wish:
'If only my spiritual companions would honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate me!' Still they honor, respect, esteem, and venerate them. Why
is that? Because their sensible spiritual companions see that they've
given up those bad unskillful qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.88">

#### [AN 10.88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Abuser ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akkosakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, any mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual
companions, speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall
into one or other of these ten disasters. What ten? They don't achieve
the unachieved. What they have achieved falls away. They don't refine
their good qualities. They overestimate their good qualities, or lead
the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit a corrupt offense, or
contract a severe illness, or go mad and lose their mind. They feel lost
when they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. Any
mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual companions, speaking
ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall into one or other of
these ten disasters."

</article>
<article id="an10.89">

#### [AN 10.89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kokālika ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kokālikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the mendicant Kokālika went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him, "Sir, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have corrupt
wishes. They've fallen under the sway of corrupt wishes."

"Don't say that, Kokālika! Don't say that, Kokālika! Have confidence in
Sāriputta and Moggallāna, they're good monks."

For a second time Kokālika said to the Buddha, "Despite my faith and
trust in the Buddha, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have corrupt wishes.
They've fallen under the sway of corrupt wishes."

"Don't say that, Kokālika! Don't say that, Kokālika! Have confidence in
Sāriputta and Moggallāna, they're good monks."

For a third time Kokālika said to the Buddha, "Despite my faith and
trust in the Buddha, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have corrupt wishes.
They've fallen under the sway of corrupt wishes."

"Don't say that, Kokālika! Don't say that, Kokālika! Have confidence in
Sāriputta and Moggallāna, they're good monks."

Then Kokālika got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. Not long after he left
his body erupted with boils the size of mustard seeds. The boils grew to
the size of mung beans, then chickpeas, then jujube seeds, then jujubes,
then myrobalans, then unripe wood apples, then ripe wood apples. Finally
they burst open, and pus and blood oozed out. He just laid down on
banana leaves like a poisoned fish.

Then Tudu the independent brahmā went to Kokālika, and standing in the
air he said to him, "Kokālika, have confidence in Sāriputta and
Moggallāna, they're good monks."

"Who are you, reverend?"

"I am Tudu the independent brahmā."

"Didn't the Buddha declare you a non-returner? So what exactly are you
doing back here? See how far you have strayed!"

Then Tudu addressed Kokālika in verse:

> "A person is born\
> with an axe in their mouth.\
> A fool cuts themselves with it\
> when they say bad words.
>
> When you praise someone worthy of criticism,\
> or criticize someone worthy of praise,\
> you choose bad luck with your own mouth:\
> you'll never find happiness that way.
>
> Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing,\
> if all you lose is your money\
> and all you own, even yourself.\
> What's really terrible luck\
> is to hate the holy ones.
>
> For more than two quinquadecillion years,\
> and another five quattuordecillion years,\
> a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell,\
> having aimed bad words and thoughts at them."

Then the mendicant Kokālika died of that illness. He was reborn in the
Pink Lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

Then, late at night, the beautiful Brahmā Sahampati, lighting up the
entire Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, "Sir, the mendicant Kokālika has passed away. He was
reborn in the pink lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta
and Moggallāna."

That's what Brahmā Sahampati said. Then he bowed and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right side, before vanishing
right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened.

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "Sir, how
long is the life span in the Pink Lotus hell?"

"It's long, mendicant. It's not easy to calculate how many years, how
many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it lasts."

"But sir, is it possible to give a simile?"

"It's possible," said the Buddha.

"Suppose there was a Kosalan cartload of twenty bushels of sesame seed.
And at the end of every hundred years someone would remove a single seed
from it. By this means the Kosalan cartload of twenty bushels of sesame
seed would run out faster than a single lifetime in the Abbuda hell.
Now, twenty lifetimes in the Abbuda hell equal one lifetime in the
Nirabbuda hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Nirabbuda hell equal one
lifetime in the Ababa hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Ababa hell equal one
lifetime in the Aṭaṭa hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Aṭaṭa hell equal one
lifetime in the Ahaha hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Ahaha hell equal one
lifetime in the Yellow Lotus hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Yellow Lotus
hell equal one lifetime in the Sweet-Smelling hell. Twenty lifetimes in
the Sweet-Smelling hell equal one lifetime in the Blue Water Lily hell.
Twenty lifetimes in the Blue Water Lily hell equal one lifetime in the
White Lotus hell. Twenty lifetimes in the White Lotus hell equal one
lifetime in the Pink Lotus hell. The mendicant Kokālika has been reborn
in the Pink Lotus hell because of his resentment for Sāriputta and
Moggallāna."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "A person is born\
> with an axe in their mouth.\
> A fool cuts themselves with it\
> when they say bad words.
>
> When you praise someone worthy of criticism,\
> or criticize someone worthy of praise,\
> you choose bad luck with your own mouth:\
> you'll never find happiness that way.
>
> Bad luck at dice is a trivial thing,\
> if all you lose is your money\
> and all you own, even yourself.\
> What's really terrible luck\
> is to hate the holy ones.
>
> For more than two quinquadecillion years,\
> and another five quattuordecillion years,\
> a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell,\
> having aimed bad words and thoughts at them."

</article>
<article id="an10.90">

#### [AN 10.90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Powers of One Who has Ended Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Khīṇāsavabalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Sāriputta, how many powers does a mendicant who has ended the
defilements have that qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have
ended.'"

"Sir, a mendicant who has ended the defilements has ten powers that
qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have ended.' What ten? Firstly, a
mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen with right wisdom all
conditions as truly impermanent. This is a power that a mendicant who
has ended the defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have
ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen with
right wisdom that sensual pleasures are truly like a pit of glowing
coals. This is a power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements
relies on to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, the mind of a mendicant with defilements ended slants,
slopes, and inclines to seclusion. They're withdrawn, loving
renunciation, and have totally eliminated defiling influences. This is a
power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to claim:
'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. This is a power that a mendicant
who has ended the defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have
ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four right efforts. ... the four bases of psychic power ... the five
faculties ... the five powers ... the seven awakening factors ... the
noble eightfold path. This is a power that a mendicant who has ended the
defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has these ten powers that
qualify them to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'"

</article>

[]{#an10-dutiyapannasaka-upalivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Upāli {#an10-dutiyapannasaka-upalivagga.xhtml_an10-dutiyapannasaka-upalivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.91">

#### [AN 10.91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Pleasure Seekers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāmabhogīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, the
Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika:

"These ten pleasure seekers are found in the world. What ten? First, a
pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. They
don't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
They make themselves happy and pleased, but don't share it and make
merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and make
merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They don't make themselves
happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They make themselves happy
and pleased, but don\'t share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They make themselves happy
and pleased, and they share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They don't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and
make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, but don't share it and
make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and
make merit. But they enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated, attached, blind
to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and
make merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached,
seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, nor
share it and make merit. They may be criticized on three grounds. They
seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is the first
ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy and pleased. This
is the second ground for criticism. They don't share it and make merit.
This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may be
criticized on these three grounds.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't
share it and make merit. They may be criticized on two grounds, and
praised on one. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the one ground for praise. They don't share it and make
merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may
be criticized on these two grounds, and praised on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares
it and makes merit. They may be criticized on one ground, and praised on
two. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is
the one ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and pleased.
This is the first ground for praise. They share it and make merit. This
is the second ground for praise. This pleasure seeker may be criticized
on this one ground, and praised on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.
They may be praised on one ground, and criticized on three. They seek
for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the one ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the second ground for criticism. They don't share
it and make merit. This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on these three.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
makes themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't share it and make merit.
They may be praised on two grounds, and criticized on two. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They don't share it and
make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares it and make merit. They
may be praised on three grounds, and criticized on one. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the one ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They share it and make
merit. This is the third ground for praise. This pleasure seeker may be
praised on these three grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased,
nor share it and make merit. They may be praised on one ground and
criticized on two. They seek for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the one ground for praise. They don't make themselves
happy and pleased. This is the first ground for criticism. They don't
share it and make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This
pleasure seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on
these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but
doesn't share it and make merit. They may be praised on two grounds and
criticized on one. They seek for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the first ground for praise. They make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They don't share it
and make merit. This is the one ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. But they enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated,
attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. They
may be praised on three grounds and criticized on one. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They make themselves happy and pleased. This is the second
ground for praise. They share it and make merit. This is the third
ground for praise. They enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated, attached,
blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. This is the
one ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may be praised on these
three grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied,
uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the
escape. They may be praised on four grounds. They seek for wealth using
legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground for praise.
They make themselves happy and pleased. This is the second ground for
praise. They share it and make merit. This is the third ground for
praise. They enjoy that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing
the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This is the fourth ground
for praise. This pleasure seeker may be praised on these four grounds.

These are the ten pleasure seekers found in the world. The pleasure
seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means, who makes
themselves happy and pleased, and shares it and makes merit, and who
uses that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks,
and understanding the escape is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and
finest of the ten. From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from
curds come butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of
ghee. And the cream of ghee is said to be the best of these.

In the same way, the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, who makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares
it and makes merit, and who uses that wealth untied, uninfatuated,
unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the ten."

</article>
<article id="an10.92">

#### [AN 10.92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Dangers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and
threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and
comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in the present
life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.
Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and
threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't
experience mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled
for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ... Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ... Anyone
who lies ... Anyone who uses alcoholic drinks that cause negligence
creates dangers and threats both in the present life and in lives to
come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from
using alcoholic drinks that cause negligence creates no dangers and
threats either in the present life or in lives to come, and doesn't
experience mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled
for anyone who refrains from using alcoholic drinks that cause
negligence. These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They have
experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained
by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.' They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good,
direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' And a noble disciple's ethical
conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. These are the four factors of stream-entry that
they have.

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and
comprehended with wisdom? It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'When
this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. When this
doesn't exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases.
That is: Ignorance is a condition for choices. Choices are a condition
for consciousness. Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name
and form are conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields
are conditions for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling
is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping.
Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is
a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is
how this entire mass of suffering originates. When ignorance fades away
and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease,
consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense
fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When
feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases.' This is the noble system that
they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom.

When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four
factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble
cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: 'I've
finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm.
I've finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am
a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am
bound for awakening.'"

</article>
<article id="an10.93">

#### [AN 10.93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [What Is Your View? ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kiṁdiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika left Sāvatthī in the middle of the
day to see the Buddha. Then it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to
see the Buddha, as he's in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the
esteemed mendicants, as they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the
monastery of the wanderers of other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions. Now
at that time, the wanderers of other religions had come together, making
an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of
low topics.

They saw Anāthapiṇḍika coming off in the distance, and stopped each
other, saying, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The householder
Anāthapiṇḍika, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming into our
monastery. He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the
ascetic Gotama, who is residing in Sāvatthī. Such venerables like the
quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he
sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach."

Then those wanderers of other religions fell silent. Then Anāthapiṇḍika
went up to them, and exchanged greetings with those wanderers. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.
The wanderers said to him, "Tell us, householder, what is the view of
the ascetic Gotama?"

"Sirs, I don't know all his views."

"Well then, since it seems you don't know all the views of the ascetic
Gotama, tell us, what are the views of the mendicants?"

"Sirs, I don't know all the mendicants' views."

"Well then, since it seems you don't know all the views of the ascetic
Gotama or of the mendicants, tell us, householder, what is your view?"

"Sirs, it's not hard for me to explain what my views are. But please,
let the venerables explain their own convictions first. Afterwards it
won't be hard for me to explain my views."

When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him, "The cosmos is
eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my
view, householder."

Another wanderer said, "The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile. That's my view, householder."

Another wanderer said, "The cosmos is finite ..." ... "The cosmos is
infinite ..." ... "The soul and the body are the same thing ..." ...
"The soul and the body are different things ..." ... "A realized one
still exists after death ..." ... "A realized one no longer exists after
death ..." ... "A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ..." ... "A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my
view, householder."

When this was said, Anāthapiṇḍika said this, "Sirs, regarding the
venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile. That's my view, householder.' This view of his
has either arisen from his own irrational application of mind, or is
conditioned by what someone else says. But that view is created,
conditioned, chosen, dependently originated. Anything that is created,
conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And
what's impermanent is suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just
suffering.

Regarding the venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This
is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my view,
householder.' This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational
application of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But
that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated.
Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. What he
clings to and holds to is just suffering.

Regarding the venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ...
'The cosmos is infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same
thing ...' ... 'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A
realized one still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer
exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile. That's my view, householder.' This view of his has either arisen
from his own irrational application of mind, or is conditioned by what
someone else says. But that view is created, conditioned, chosen,
dependently originated. Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen,
and dependently originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is
suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just suffering."

When he said this the wanderers said to him, "Householder, we've each
explained our own convictions. Tell us, householder, what is your view?"

"Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. And
what's suffering is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self. That's
my view, sirs."

"Householder, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and
dependently originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is
suffering. What you cling to and hold to is just suffering."

"Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. And I've
truly seen clearly with right wisdom that what's suffering is not mine,
I am not this, it's not my self. And I truly understand the escape
beyond that."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. Seeing this,
Anāthapiṇḍika got up from his seat. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

"Good, good, householder! That's how you should legitimately and
completely refute those futile men from time to time."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the
householder Anāthapiṇḍika with a Dhamma talk, after which Anāthapiṇḍika
got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before
leaving.

Then, not long after Anāthapiṇḍika had left, the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, even a mendicant who has ordained for a hundred
years in this teaching and training would legitimately and completely
refute those wanderers of other religions just as the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika did."

</article>
<article id="an10.94">

#### [AN 10.94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Vajjiyamāhita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vajjiyamāhitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the
Gaggarā Lotus Pond.

Then the householder Vajjiyamāhita left Sāvatthī in the middle of the
day to see the Buddha. Then it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to
see the Buddha, as he's in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the
esteemed mendicants, as they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the
monastery of the wanderers of other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions. Now
at that time, the wanderers of other religions had come together, making
an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of
low topics.

They saw Vajjiyamāhita coming off in the distance, and stopped each
other, saying, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The householder
Vajjiyamāhita, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming into our
monastery. He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the
ascetic Gotama, who is residing near Campā. Such venerables like the
quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he
sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to approach."

Then those wanderers of other religions fell silent. Then Vajjiyamāhita
went up to them, and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side. The wanderers said to him:

"Is it really true, householder? Does the ascetic Gotama criticize all
forms of mortification? Does he categorically condemn and denounce those
fervent mortifiers who live rough?"

"No, sirs, the Buddha does not criticize all forms of mortification. Nor
does he categorically condemn and denounce those fervent mortifiers who
live rough. The Buddha criticizes where it is due, and praises where it
is due. In doing so he is one who speaks after analyzing the question,
and is not one-sided on this point."

When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him, "Hold on,
householder! That ascetic Gotama who you praise is an exterminator who
refrains from making statements."

"On this point, also, I reasonably respond to the venerables. The Buddha
has stated 'This is skillful' and 'This is unskillful'. So when it comes
to what is skillful and unskillful the Buddha makes a statement. He is
not an exterminator who refrains from making statements."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. Seeing this,
Vajjiyamāhita got up from his seat. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

"Good, good, householder! That's how you should legitimately and
completely refute those futile men from time to time. Householder, I
don't say that all mortifications should be undergone. But I don't say
that no mortifications should be undergone. I don't say that all
observances should be undertaken. But I don't say that no observances
should be undertaken. I don't say that all efforts should be tried. But
I don't say that no efforts should be tried. I don't say that everything
should be given up. But I don't say that nothing should be given up. I
don't say that you should be liberated with all kinds of freedom. But I
don't say that you should not be liberated with any kind of freedom.

When undergoing certain mortifications, unskillful qualities grow while
skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't undergo those
mortifications. When undergoing certain mortifications, unskillful
qualities decline while skillful qualities grow. I say that you should
undergo those mortifications.

When undertaking certain observances, unskillful qualities grow while
skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't undertake those
observances. When undertaking certain observances, unskillful qualities
decline while skillful qualities grow. I say that you should undertake
those observances.

When trying certain efforts, unskillful qualities grow while skillful
qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't try those efforts. When
trying certain efforts, unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow. I say that you should try those efforts.

When giving up certain things, unskillful qualities grow while skillful
qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't give up those things. When
giving up certain things, unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow. I say that you should give up those things.

When being liberated with certain kinds of freedom, unskillful qualities
grow while skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't be
liberated with those kinds of freedom. When being liberated with certain
kinds of freedom, unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities
grow. I say that you should be liberated with those kinds of freedom."

After Vajjiyamāhita had been educated, encouraged, fired up, and
inspired with a Dhamma talk by the Buddha, he got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.

Then, not long after Vajjiyamāhita had left, the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, even a mendicant who for a long time has had
little dust in their eye in this teaching and training would
legitimately and completely refute those wanderers of other religions
just as the householder Vajjiyamāhita did."

</article>
<article id="an10.95">

#### [AN 10.95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Uttiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uttiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the wanderer Uttiya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, is this right: 'The cosmos
is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"Then is this right: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"Then is this right: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is
infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same thing ...' ...
'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A realized one
still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer exists after
death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"When asked about all these points, Mister Gotama says that they have
not been declared by him.

So what exactly has been declared by Mister Gotama?"

"Uttiya, I teach my disciples from my own insight in order to purify
sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain
and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to realize
extinguishment."

"But when Mister Gotama teaches in this way, is the whole world saved,
or half, or a third?" But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "The wanderer Uttiya must not get the
harmful misconception: 'When the ascetic Gotama was asked this
all-important question he falters without answering. He just can't do
it!' That would be for his lasting harm and suffering."

Then Ānanda said to the wanderer Uttiya, "Well then, Reverend Uttiya, I
shall give you a simile. For by means of a simile some sensible people
understand the meaning of what is said. Suppose there was a king's
frontier citadel with fortified embankments, ramparts, and arches, and a
single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in. As he walks
around the patrol path, he doesn't see a hole or cleft in the wall, not
even one big enough for a cat to slip out. He doesn't know how many
creatures enter or leave the citadel. But he does know that whatever
sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of them do so via this
gate.

In the same way, it's not the Realized One's concern whether the whole
world is saved by this, or half, or a third. But the Realized One knows
that whoever is saved from the world---whether in the past, the future,
or the present---all have given up the five hindrances, corruptions of
the heart that weaken wisdom. They have firmly established their mind in
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. And they have truly developed
the seven awakening factors. That's how they're saved from the world, in
the past, future, or present. Uttiya, you were just asking the Buddha
the same question as before in a different way. That's why he didn't
answer."

</article>
<article id="an10.96">

#### [AN 10.96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Kokanada ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kokanudasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Rājagaha in the Hot
Springs Monastery. Then Ānanda rose at the crack of dawn and went to the
hot springs to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged from the water he
stood in one robe drying his limbs. The wanderer Kokanada also rose at
the crack of dawn and went to the hot springs to bathe.

He saw Ānanda coming off in the distance and said to him, "Who's here,
reverend?"

"I'm a mendicant, reverend."

"Of which mendicants?"

"Of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan."

"I'd like to ask the venerable about a certain point, if you'd take the
time to answer."

"Ask, reverend. When I've heard it I'll know."

"Is this your view: 'The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is
infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same thing ...' ...
'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A realized one
still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer exists after
death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then, sir, do you neither know nor see?"

"That's not so, reverend. I do know and see."

"When asked about all these points, you say that's not your view.

Yet when asked whether you neither know nor see, you say, 'That's not
so, reverend. I do know and see.' How then should we see the meaning of
this statement?"

"'The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile:' that's a misconception. 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile:' that's a misconception. 'The
cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is infinite ...' ... 'The soul and
the body are the same thing ...' ... 'The soul and the body are
different things ...' ... 'A realized one still exists after death ...'
... 'A realized one no longer exists after death ...' ... 'A realized
one both still exists and no longer exists after death ...' ... 'A
Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile:' that's a misconception.

I know and see the scope of convictions, the scope of grounds for views,
fixation on views, obsession with views, the origin of views, and the
uprooting of views. Knowing and seeing thus, why should I say: 'I
neither know nor see?' I do know and see."

"What is the venerable's name? And how are you known among your
spiritual companions?"

"Reverend, my name is Ānanda. And that's how I'm known among my
spiritual companions."

"Goodness! I had no idea I was consulting such a great tutor as
Venerable Ānanda! If I had known who you were, I wouldn't have said so
much. May Venerable Ānanda please forgive me."

</article>
<article id="an10.97">

#### [AN 10.97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āhuneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a mendicant with ten qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What ten?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They have good friends, companions, and associates.

They have right view, possessing right perspective.

They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They
control the body as far as the Brahmā realm.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in samādhi ... mind
not immersed in samādhi ... freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind
as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' Thus they recollect their many past
lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They spoke ill of the noble
ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never spoke ill of the
noble ones; they had right view; and they acted out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

</article>
<article id="an10.98">

#### [AN 10.98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Senior Mendicant ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Therasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with ten qualities lives comfortably in
whatever region they live. What ten?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing
them, and comprehending them theoretically.

Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well
analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and
accompanying material.

They're skilled in raising and settling disciplinary issues.

They love the teachings and are a delight to converse with, being full
of joy in the teaching and training.

They're content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.

They look impressive when going out and coming back, and are well
restrained when sitting in an inhabited area.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life
that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these ten qualities lives comfortably in
whatever region they live."

</article>
<article id="an10.99">

#### [AN 10.99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Upāli ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upālisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him, "Sir, I wish to frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest."

"Upāli, remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest are
challenging. It's hard to maintain seclusion and hard to find joy in it.
Staying alone, the forests seem to rob the mind of a mendicant who isn't
immersed in samādhi. If someone should say this, 'Though I don't have
immersion, I'm going to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and
the forest.' You can expect that they'll sink down or float away.

Suppose there was a large lake, and along comes a bull elephant with a
height of seven or eight cubits. He'd think, 'Why don't I plunge into
this lake and play around while washing my ears and back? When I've
bathed and drunk, I'll emerge from the water and go wherever I want.'
And that's just what he does. Why is that? Because his large life-form
finds a footing in the depths.

Then along comes a rabbit or a cat. They'd think, 'What difference is
there between me and a bull elephant? Why don't I plunge into this lake
and play around while washing my ears and back? When I've bathed and
drunk, I'll emerge from the water and go wherever I want.' They jump
into the lake rashly, without thinking. You can expect that they'll sink
down or float away. Why is that? Because their little life-form finds no
footing in the depths. If someone should say this, 'Though I don't have
immersion, I'm going to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and
the forest.' You can expect that they'll sink down or float away.

Suppose there was a little baby boy playing in his own urine and feces.
What do you think, Upāli? Isn't that a totally foolish game?"

"Yes, sir."

"After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature. He
accordingly plays childish games such as toy plows, tip-cat,
somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, and toy bows. What do
you think, Upāli? Aren't such games better than what he did before?"

"Yes, sir."

"After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature further. He
accordingly amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. Sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by
the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ...
Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. What do you think, Upāli? Aren't such
games better than what he did before?"

"Yes, sir."

"But then a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras and Brahmās, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to
others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he
reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect, 'Living in a house is cramped and dirty, but the life of one
gone forth is wide open. It's not easy for someone living at home to
lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.
Why don't I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness?'

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or
small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving.

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of sex.

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and trustworthy, and don't trick the world with their words.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They avoid injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They avoid
seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They avoid beautifying and
adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. They avoid
high and luxurious beds. They avoid receiving gold and currency, raw
grains, raw meat, women and girls, male and female bondservants, goats
and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and
fields and land. They avoid running errands and messages; buying and
selling; falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud,
cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry,
plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. When they hear a
sound with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ...
When they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch
with their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't
get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were
left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice
restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.
When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied
bliss inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense
restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, they
frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill,
a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a
heap of straw. Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, they sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. What do you think, Upāli? Isn't this
state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. What do
you think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' What do you
think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. ..." ...

"Furthermore, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending
of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', a mendicant enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. What do you think, Upāli? Isn't this state
better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite', a mendicant enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. ..." ...

"Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware
that 'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension
of nothingness. ..." ...

"Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, aware that 'this is
peaceful, this is sublime', they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. What do you think, Upāli? Isn't
this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception
and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an
end. What do you think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they
had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. And they have achieved
their own goal. Come on, Upāli, stay with the Saṅgha. If you stay with
the Saṅgha you'll be comfortable."

</article>
<article id="an10.100">

#### [AN 10.100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Cannot ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Abhabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, without giving up ten things you can't realize perfection.
What ten? Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt,
jealousy, stinginess, and conceit. Without giving up these ten things
you can't realize perfection.

After giving up ten things you can realize perfection. What ten? Greed,
hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy,
stinginess, and conceit. After giving up these ten things you can
realize perfection."

</article>

[]{#an10-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Third Fifty {#an10-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an10-tatiyapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Perceptions for Ascetics {#an10-tatiyapannasaka.xhtml_an10-samanasannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.101">

#### [AN 10.101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Perceptions for Ascetics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇasaññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when these three perceptions for ascetics are developed and
cultivated they fulfill seven things. What three? 'I have secured
freedom from class.' 'My livelihood is tied up with others.' 'My
behavior should be different.' When these three perceptions for ascetics
are developed and cultivated they fulfill seven things.

What seven? Their deeds and behavior are always consistent with the
precepts. They're content, kind-hearted, and humble. They want to train.
They use the necessities of life after reflecting on their purpose.
They're energetic. When those three perceptions for ascetics are
developed and cultivated they fulfill these seven things."

</article>
<article id="an10.102">

#### [AN 10.102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Awakening Factors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bojjhaṅgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, when the seven awakening factors are developed and
cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. When these seven awakening
factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. What
three? It's when a mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives.
That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the
world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the
world contracting and expanding. They recollect their many kinds of past
lives, with features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and
surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn
according to their deeds. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. When those
seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill these
three knowledges."

</article>
<article id="an10.103">

#### [AN 10.103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Wrong Way ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, relying on the wrong way leads to failure, not success. And
how does relying on the wrong way lead to failure, not success? Wrong
view gives rise to wrong thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong
speech. Wrong speech gives rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise
to wrong livelihood. Wrong livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong
effort gives rise to wrong mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to
wrong immersion. Wrong immersion gives rise to wrong knowledge. Wrong
knowledge gives rise to wrong freedom. That's how relying on the wrong
way leads to failure, not success.

Relying on the right way leads to success, not failure. And how does
relying on the right way lead to success, not failure? Right view gives
rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to right speech. Right
speech gives rise to right action. Right action gives rise to right
livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. Right effort
gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness gives rise to right
immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right knowledge. Right
knowledge gives rise to right freedom. That's how relying on the right
way leads to success, not failure."

</article>
<article id="an10.104">

#### [AN 10.104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Seed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bījasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, consider a person who has wrong view, thought, speech,
action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion, knowledge, and
freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering.
Why is that? Because their view is bad.

Suppose a seed of neem, angled gourd, or bitter gourd was planted in
moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its bitter, acerbic, and unpleasant taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is bad. In the same way, consider a person who has
wrong view, thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness,
immersion, knowledge, and freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental
deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims,
wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable,
disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. Why is that? Because their view is
bad.

Consider a person who has right view, thought, speech, action,
livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion, knowledge, and freedom.
Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with
that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is that?
Because their view is good.

Suppose a seed of sugar cane, fine rice, or grape was planted in moist
earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water would
lead to its sweet, pleasant, and delicious taste. Why is that? Because
the seed is fine. In the same way, consider a person who has right view,
thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion,
knowledge, and freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they
undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and
choices all lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial,
and pleasant. Why is that? Because their view is good."

</article>
<article id="an10.105">

#### [AN 10.105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Knowledge ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vijjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities,
with lack of conscience and prudence following along. An ignoramus, sunk
in ignorance, gives rise to wrong view. Wrong view gives rise to wrong
thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. Wrong speech gives
rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. Wrong
livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong effort gives rise to wrong
mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion. Wrong
immersion gives rise to wrong knowledge. Wrong knowledge gives rise to
wrong freedom.

Knowledge precedes the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience
and prudence following along. A sage, firm in knowledge, gives rise to
right view. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives
rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right
action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to
right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right
mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to
right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.106">

#### [AN 10.106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wearing Away ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nijjarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are these ten grounds for wearing away. What ten?

For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. And
because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong thought are worn away.
And because of right thought, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong speech are worn away.
And because of right speech, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong action are worn away.
And because of right action, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong livelihood are
worn away. And because of right livelihood, many skillful qualities are
fully developed.

For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong effort are worn away.
And because of right effort, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong mindfulness
are worn away. And because of right mindfulness, many skillful qualities
are fully developed.

For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong immersion are worn
away. And because of right immersion, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong knowledge are worn
away. And because of right knowledge, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away.
And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

These are the ten grounds for wearing away."

</article>
<article id="an10.107">

#### [AN 10.107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Bone-Washing Ceremony ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhovanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, in the southern lands there is a ceremony named
'bone-washing'. There they have food, drink, snacks, meals,
refreshments, and beverages, as well as dancing, singing, and music.
There is such a washing, I don't deny it. But that washing is low,
crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

I will teach a noble washing that leads solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
Relying on that washing, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old
age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are
freed from all these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is that noble washing?

For one of right view, wrong view is washed away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are washed away.
And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is washed away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is washed away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is washed away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is washed away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
washed away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is
washed away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is washed
away. ... For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is washed away.
...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is washed away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are washed
away. And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully
developed. This is the noble washing that leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. Relying on this washing, sentient beings who are liable
to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are freed from all these things."

</article>
<article id="an10.108">

#### [AN 10.108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Doctors ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tikicchakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, doctors prescribe a purgative for eliminating illnesses
stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind. There is such a
purgative, I don't deny it. But this kind of purgative sometimes works
and sometimes fails.

I will teach a noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on that
purgative, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and
death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed
from all these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the noble purgative that works without fail?

For one of right view, wrong view is purged. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are purged. And because of
right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is purged. ... For one of right
speech, wrong speech is purged. ... For one of right action, wrong
action is purged. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is
purged. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is purged. For one of
right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is purged. ... For one of right
immersion, wrong immersion is purged. ... For one of right knowledge,
wrong knowledge is purged. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is purged. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are purged. And because
of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. This is
the noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on this purgative,
sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things."

</article>
<article id="an10.109">

#### [AN 10.109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Emetic ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vamanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, doctors prescribe an emetic for eliminating illnesses
stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind. There is such an
emetic, I don't deny it. But this kind of emetic sometimes works and
sometimes fails.

I will teach a noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on that
emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death,
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. ...

And what is that noble emetic that works without fail?

For one of right view, wrong view is vomited up. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are vomited up. And because
of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is vomited up. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is vomited up. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is vomited up. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is vomited up. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
vomited up. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is
vomited up. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is vomited
up. ... For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is vomited up. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is vomited up. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are vomited up. And
because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.
This is the noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on this
emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death,
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things."

</article>
<article id="an10.110">

#### [AN 10.110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blown Away ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Niddhamanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten qualities should be blown away. What ten? For one
of right view, wrong view is blown away. And the many bad, unskillful
qualities produced by wrong view are blown away. And because of right
view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is blown away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is blown away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is blown away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is blown away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
blown away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is blown
away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is blown away. ...
For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is blown away. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is blown away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are blown away. And
because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.
These are the ten qualities that should be blown away."

</article>
<article id="an10.111">

#### [AN 10.111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Adept (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this person called 'an adept'. How is an adept
mendicant defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a mendicant has an adept's right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
That's how a mendicant is an adept."

</article>
<article id="an10.112">

#### [AN 10.112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [An Adept (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten qualities of an adept. What ten? An adept\'s
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and
right freedom. These are the ten qualities of an adept."

</article>

[]{#an10-paccorohanivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Ceremony of Descent {#an10-paccorohanivagga.xhtml_an10-paccorohanivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.113">

#### [AN 10.113]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles with bad results. And you
should know good principles with good results. Knowing these things,
your practice should follow the good principles with good results.

And what are bad principles with bad results? Wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. These
are called bad principles with bad results.

And what are good principles with good results? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
These are called good principles with good results.

'You should know bad principles with bad results. And you should know
good principles with good results. Knowing these things, your practice
should follow the good principles with good results.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.114">

#### [AN 10.114]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you
should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your
practice should follow the good principles with good results.

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad
results? And what are good results?

Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.
And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view
are good results.

Wrong thought is a bad principle. Right thought is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong thought are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right thought are good results.

Wrong speech is a bad principle. Right speech is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong speech are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right speech are good results.

Wrong action is a bad principle. Right action is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong action are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right action are good results.

Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. Right livelihood is a good
principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong
livelihood are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully
developed because of right livelihood are good results.

Wrong effort is a bad principle. Right effort is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong effort are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right effort are good results.

Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. Right mindfulness is a good
principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong
mindfulness are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully
developed because of right mindfulness are good results.

Wrong immersion is a bad principle. Right immersion is a good principle.
And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong immersion are
bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right immersion are good results.

Wrong knowledge is a bad principle. Right knowledge is a good principle.
And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong knowledge are
bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right knowledge are good results.

Wrong freedom is a bad principle. Right freedom is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right freedom are good results.

'You should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know
bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should
follow the good principles with good results.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.115">

#### [AN 10.115]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you
should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your
practice should follow the good principles with good results."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. Who can explain in detail the meaning
of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?"

Then they considered, "This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha
and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Let's go to him, and ask him about this matter. As he
answers, so we'll remember it."

Then those mendicants went to Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side. They told him what had happened, and said, "May Venerable
Ānanda please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves. Such is the
consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the
Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me about this
matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer. Still, Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and
esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. You are capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail: 'You should know bad
principles and good principles. And you should know bad results and good
results. Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good
principles with good results.'

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad
results? And what are good results?

Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.
And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view
are good results.

Wrong thought is a bad principle. Right thought is a good principle. ...
Wrong speech is a bad principle. Right speech is a good principle. ...
Wrong action is a bad principle. Right action is a good principle. ...
Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. Right livelihood is a good
principle. ... Wrong effort is a bad principle. Right effort is a good
principle. ... Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. Right mindfulness
is a good principle. ... Wrong immersion is a bad principle. Right
immersion is a good principle. ... Wrong knowledge is a bad principle.
Right knowledge is a good principle. ...

Wrong freedom is a bad principle. Right freedom is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right freedom are good results.

The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling
without explaining the meaning in detail: 'You should know bad
principles and good principles ... and practice accordingly.' And this
is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital. If you
wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

"Yes, reverend," said those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what
Ānanda said. Then they rose from their seats and went to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they
said:

"Sir, we went to Ānanda and asked him about this matter. And Ānanda
clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with these words and
phrases."

"Good, good, mendicants! Ānanda is astute, he has great wisdom. If you
came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the
same way as Ānanda. That is what it means, and that's how you should
remember it."

</article>
<article id="an10.116">

#### [AN 10.116]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Ajita ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ajitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the wanderer Ajita went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, we have a
spiritual companion called 'The Philosopher'. He has worked out around
five hundred arguments by which followers of other religions will know
when they've been refuted."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you remember
this philosopher's points?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
speak and the mendicants will remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, take a certain person who rebuts and quashes unprincipled
statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled
assembly, who make a dreadful racket: 'He's a true philosopher! He's a
true philosopher!'

Another person rebuts and quashes principled statements with
unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly, who
make a dreadful racket: 'He's a true philosopher! He's a true
philosopher!'

Another person rebuts and quashes principled and unprincipled statements
with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly,
who make a dreadful racket: 'He's a true philosopher! He's a true
philosopher!'

Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you
should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your
practice should follow the good principles with good results.

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad
results? And what are good results? Wrong view is a bad principle. Right
view is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities
produced by wrong view are bad results. And the many skillful qualities
fully developed because of right view are good results.

Wrong thought is a bad principle. Right thought is a good principle. ...
Wrong speech is a bad principle. Right speech is a good principle. ...
Wrong action is a bad principle. Right action is a good principle. ...
Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. Right livelihood is a good
principle. ... Wrong effort is a bad principle. Right effort is a good
principle. ... Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. Right mindfulness
is a good principle. ... Wrong immersion is a bad principle. Right
immersion is a good principle. ... Wrong knowledge is a bad principle.
Right knowledge is a good principle. ...

Wrong freedom is a bad principle. Right freedom is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
right freedom are good results.

'You should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know
bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should
follow the good principles with good results.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.117">

#### [AN 10.117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, what is the near shore? And what is the far shore?"

"Wrong view is the near shore, brahmin, and right view is the far shore.
Wrong thought is the near shore, and right thought is the far shore.
Wrong speech is the near shore, and right speech is the far shore. Wrong
action is the near shore, and right action is the far shore. Wrong
livelihood is the near shore, and right livelihood is the far shore.
Wrong effort is the near shore, and right effort is the far shore. Wrong
mindfulness is the near shore, and right mindfulness is the far shore.
Wrong immersion is the near shore, and right immersion is the far shore.
Wrong knowledge is the near shore, and right knowledge is the far shore.
Wrong freedom is the near shore, and right freedom is the far shore.
This is the near shore, and this is the far shore.

> Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run around\
> on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's domain so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> would cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> Those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> who, letting go of attachments,\
> delight in not grasping:\
> with defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they in this world are quenched."

</article>
<article id="an10.118">

#### [AN 10.118]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Near Shore ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Orimatīrasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is the near shore? What is the far shore? Wrong
view is the near shore, and right view is the far shore. ... Wrong
freedom is the near shore, and right freedom is the far shore. This is
the near shore, and this is the far shore.

> Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's domain so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

</article>
<article id="an10.119">

#### [AN 10.119]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ceremony of Descent (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamapaccorohaṇīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Now, at that time it was the sabbath. The brahmin Jānussoṇi had bathed
his head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes. Holding a handful of
fresh grass, he stood to one side not far from the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him, and said, "Brahmin, why have you bathed your head
and dressed in a new pair of linen robes? Why are you standing to one
side holding a handful of fresh grass? What's going on today with the
brahmin clan?"

"Mister Gotama, today is the ceremony of descent for the brahmin clan."

"But how do the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, on the sabbath the brahmins bathe their heads and
dress in a new pair of linen robes. They make a heap of fresh cow dung
and spread it with green grass. Then they make their beds between the
boundary and the fire chamber. That night they rise three times and
worship the fire with joined palms: 'We descend, lord! We descend,
lord!' And they serve the fire with abundant ghee, oil, and butter. And
when the night has passed they serve the brahmins with delicious fresh
and cooked foods. That's how the brahmins observe the ceremony of
descent."

"The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different
from that observed in the training of the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is the ceremony of descent observed in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'Wrong view has a bad result in
both this life and the next.' Reflecting like this, they give up wrong
view, they descend from wrong view.

'Wrong thought has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong thought, they descend from
wrong thought.

'Wrong speech has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong speech, they descend from wrong
speech.

'Wrong action has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong action, they descend from wrong
action.

'Wrong livelihood has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong livelihood, they descend from
wrong livelihood.

'Wrong effort has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong effort, they descend from wrong
effort.

'Wrong mindfulness has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong mindfulness, they descend from
wrong mindfulness.

'Wrong immersion has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong immersion, they descend from
wrong immersion.

'Wrong knowledge has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong knowledge, they descend from
wrong knowledge.

'Wrong freedom has a bad result in both this life and the next.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong freedom, they descend from
wrong freedom. This is the ceremony of descent in the training of the
Noble One."

"The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different
from that observed in the training of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama,
the ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is not worth a
sixteenth part of a master of the ceremony of descent observed in the
training of the Noble One. Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day
forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an10.120">

#### [AN 10.120]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ceremony of Descent (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyapaccorohaṇīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the noble descent. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak. ... And what is the noble descent? It's when a
noble disciple reflects: 'Wrong view has a bad result in both this life
and the next.' Reflecting like this, they give up wrong view, they
descend from wrong view. 'Wrong thought has a bad result ...' ... 'Wrong
speech ...' ... 'Wrong action ...' ... 'Wrong livelihood ...' ... 'Wrong
effort ...' ... 'Wrong mindfulness ...' ... 'Wrong immersion ...' ...
'Wrong knowledge ...' ... 'Wrong freedom has a bad result in both this
life and the next.' Reflecting like this, they give up wrong freedom,
they descend from wrong freedom. This is called the noble descent."

</article>
<article id="an10.121">

#### [AN 10.121]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Forerunner ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pubbaṅgamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way right view is the forerunner and precursor of skillful
qualities. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives
rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right
action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to
right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right
mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to
right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.122">

#### [AN 10.122]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ending of Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsavakkhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, lead to
the ending of defilements. What ten? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These ten things,
when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of defilements."

</article>

[]{#an10-parisuddhavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Purified {#an10-parisuddhavagga.xhtml_an10-parisuddhavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.123">

#### [AN 10.123]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [First ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things are not purified and cleansed apart from
the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These ten things
are not purified and cleansed apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.124">

#### [AN 10.124]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Second ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things don't arise apart from the Holy One's
training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things
that don't arise apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.125">

#### [AN 10.125]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Third ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things are not very fruitful and beneficial apart
from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten
things that are not very fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy
One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.126">

#### [AN 10.126]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fourth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things don't culminate in the removal of greed,
hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. These are the ten things that don't culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.127">

#### [AN 10.127]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fifth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These
are the ten things that don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.128">

#### [AN 10.128]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sixth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Chaṭṭhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things don't arise to be developed and cultivated
apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These
are the ten things that don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart
from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.129">

#### [AN 10.129]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Seventh ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sattamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated are not very
fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy One's training. What ten?
Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and
right freedom. These are the ten things that when developed and
cultivated are not very fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy
One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.130">

#### [AN 10.130]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eighth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṭṭhamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated don't
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion apart from the
Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things
that when developed and cultivated don't culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.131">

#### [AN 10.131]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ninth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Navamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated don't lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment apart from the Holy One's training. What
ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things that when
developed and cultivated don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training."

</article>
<article id="an10.132">

#### [AN 10.132]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Tenth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dasamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten wrong ways. What ten? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
These are the ten wrong ways."

</article>
<article id="an10.133">

#### [AN 10.133]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Eleventh ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ekādasamasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, there are ten right ways. What ten? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
These are the ten right ways."

</article>

[]{#an10-tatiyapannasaka-sadhuvagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Good {#an10-tatiyapannasaka-sadhuvagga.xhtml_an10-tatiyapannasaka-sadhuvagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.134">

#### [AN 10.134]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sādhusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is not good? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what
is not good. And what is good? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called what is
good."

</article>
<article id="an10.135">

#### [AN 10.135]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching of the Noble Ones ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the noble ones, and what
is not the teaching of the noble ones. ... And what is not the teaching
of the noble ones? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what is
not the teaching of the noble ones. And what is the teaching of the
noble ones? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the teaching of the noble
ones."

</article>
<article id="an10.136">

#### [AN 10.136]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unskillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Akusalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the skillful and the unskillful ... And what is the
unskillful? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the unskillful. And what is
the skillful? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the skillful."

</article>
<article id="an10.137">

#### [AN 10.137]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Beneficial ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the beneficial and the harmful. ... And what is the
harmful? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the harmful. And what is
the beneficial? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an10.138">

#### [AN 10.138]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you what is the teaching and what is not the teaching. ...
And what is not the teaching? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech,
wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what is
not the teaching. And what is the teaching? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This
is called the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an10.139">

#### [AN 10.139]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Defiled ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the defiled principle and the undefiled. ... And what
is the defiled principle? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the
defiled principle. And what is the undefiled principle? Right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. This is called the undefiled principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.140">

#### [AN 10.140]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sāvajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the blameworthy principle and the blameless principle.
... And what is the blameworthy principle? Wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This
is called the blameworthy principle. And what is the blameless
principle? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the blameless principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.141">

#### [AN 10.141]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mortifying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tapanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the mortifying principle and the unmortifying. ... And
what is the mortifying principle? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the
mortifying principle. And what is the unmortifying principle? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. This is called the unmortifying principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.142">

#### [AN 10.142]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accumulation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ācayagāmisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that leads to accumulation and that
which leads to dispersal. ... And what is the principle that leads to
accumulation? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the principle that
leads to accumulation. And what is the principle that leads to
dispersal? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle that leads to
dispersal."

</article>
<article id="an10.143">

#### [AN 10.143]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Suffering as Outcome ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhudrayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that has suffering as outcome, and that
which has happiness as outcome. ... And what is the principle whose
outcome is suffering? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is the principle
whose outcome is suffering. And what is the principle whose outcome is
happiness? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is the principle whose outcome is
happiness."

</article>
<article id="an10.144">

#### [AN 10.144]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Result in Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhavipākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that results in suffering and that which
results in happiness. ... And what principle results in suffering? Wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle that results in suffering. And
what principle results in happiness? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle that results in happiness."

</article>

[]{#an10-ariyavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Noble Path {#an10-ariyavagga.xhtml_an10-ariyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.145">

#### [AN 10.145]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Path ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path. ... And what is
the ignoble path? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the ignoble path. And
what is the noble path? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the noble
path."

</article>
<article id="an10.146">

#### [AN 10.146]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Dark Path ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kaṇhamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the dark path and the bright path. ... And what is the
dark path? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the dark path. And what is
the bright path? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the bright path."

</article>
<article id="an10.147">

#### [AN 10.147]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The True Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you what is the true teaching and what is not the true
teaching. ... And what is not the true teaching? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called what is not the true teaching. And what is the true
teaching? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an10.148">

#### [AN 10.148]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching of the True Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the true persons and the
teaching of the untrue persons. ... And what is the teaching of the
untrue persons? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is the teaching of the untrue
persons. And what is the teaching of the true persons? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is the teaching of the true persons."

</article>
<article id="an10.149">

#### [AN 10.149]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Activated ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uppādetabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to activate and the principle not to
activate. ... And what is the principle not to activate? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to activate. And what is the
principle to activate? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to activate."

</article>
<article id="an10.150">

#### [AN 10.150]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Cultivated ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsevitabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to cultivate and the principle not to
cultivate. ... And what is the principle not to cultivate? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to cultivate. And what is the
principle to cultivate? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to cultivate."

</article>
<article id="an10.151">

#### [AN 10.151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Developed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhāvetabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to develop and the principle not to
develop. ... And what is the principle not to develop? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called the principle not to develop. And what is the principle
to develop? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle to develop."

</article>
<article id="an10.152">

#### [AN 10.152]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Made Much Of ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahulīkātabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to make much of and the principle not to
make much of. ... And what is the principle not to make much of? Wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to make much of. And what is
the principle to make much of? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to make much of."

</article>
<article id="an10.153">

#### [AN 10.153]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Recollected ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anussaritabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to recollect and the principle not to
recollect. ... And what is the principle not to recollect? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to recollect. And what is the
principle to recollect? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to recollect."

</article>
<article id="an10.154">

#### [AN 10.154]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Realized ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sacchikātabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to realize and the principle not to
realize. ... And what is the principle not to realize? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called the principle not to realize. And what is the principle
to realize? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle to realize."

</article>

[]{#an10-catutthapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fourth Fifty {#an10-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an10-catutthapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Persons {#an10-catutthapannasaka.xhtml_an10-puggalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.155">

#### [AN 10.155]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [You Should Associate ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sevitabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should not associate with a person who has ten
qualities. What ten? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. You should not associate
with a person who has these ten qualities.

You should associate with a person who has ten qualities. What ten?
Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and
right freedom. You should associate with a person who has these ten
qualities."

</article>
<article id="an10.156-166">

#### [AN 10.156--166]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Frequenting, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhajitabbādisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should not frequent a person who has ten qualities. ...
you should frequent ... you should not pay homage ... you should pay
homage ... you should not venerate ... you should venerate ... you
should not praise ... you should praise ... you should not respect ...
you should respect ... you should not revere ... you should revere ...
is not a success ... is a success ... is not pure ... is pure ... does
not win over conceit ... wins over conceit ... does not grow in wisdom
... grows in wisdom ...

creates much wickedness ... creates much merit. What ten? Right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. A person who has these ten qualities creates much merit."

</article>

[]{#an10-janussonivagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter with Jānussoṇi {#an10-janussonivagga.xhtml_an10-janussonivagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.167">

#### [AN 10.167]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Brahmin Ceremony of Descent ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brāhmaṇapaccorohaṇīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Now, at that time it was the sabbath. The brahmin Jānussoṇi had bathed
his head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes. Holding a handful of
fresh grass, he stood to one side not far from the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him, and said, "Brahmin, why have you bathed your head
and dressed in a new pair of linen robes? Why are you standing to one
side holding a handful of fresh grass? What's going on today with the
brahmin clan?"

"Mister Gotama, today is the ceremony of descent for the brahmin clan."

"But how do the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, on the sabbath the brahmins bathe their heads and
dress in a new pair of linen robes. They make a heap of fresh cow dung
and spread it with green grass. Then they make their beds between the
boundary and the fire chamber. That night they rise three times and
worship the fire with joined palms: 'We descend, lord! We descend,
lord!' And they serve the fire with abundant ghee, oil, and butter. And
when the night has passed they serve the brahmins with delicious fresh
and cooked foods. That's how the brahmins observe the ceremony of
descent."

"The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different
from that observed in the training of the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is the ceremony of descent observed in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'Killing living creatures has a
bad result in the present life and in lives to come.' Reflecting like
this, they give up killing living creatures, they descend from killing
living creatures.

... 'Stealing has a bad result in the present life and in lives to
come.' Reflecting like this, they give up stealing, they descend from
stealing.

... 'Sexual misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in lives
to come.' Reflecting like this, they give up sexual misconduct, they
descend from sexual misconduct.

... 'Lying has a bad result in the present life and in lives to come.'
Reflecting like this, they give up lying, they descend from lying.

... 'Divisive speech has a bad result in the present life and in lives
to come.' Reflecting like this, they give up divisive speech, they
descend from divisive speech.

... 'Harsh speech has a bad result in the present life and in lives to
come.' Reflecting like this, they give up harsh speech, they descend
from harsh speech.

... 'Talking nonsense has a bad result in the present life and in lives
to come.' Reflecting like this, they give up talking nonsense, they
descend from talking nonsense.

... 'Covetousness has a bad result in the present life and in lives to
come.' Reflecting like this, they give up covetousness, they descend
from covetousness.

... 'Ill will has a bad result in the present life and in lives to
come.' Reflecting like this, they give up ill will, they descend from
ill will.

'Wrong view has a bad result in the present life and in lives to come.'
Reflecting like this, they give up wrong view, they descend from wrong
view. This is the ceremony of descent in the training of the Noble One."

"The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different
from that observed in the training of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama,
the ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is not worth a
sixteenth part of the ceremony of descent observed in the training of
the Noble One. Excellent, Mister Gotama, excellent! ... From this day
forth, may Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an10.168">

#### [AN 10.168]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Descent ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyapaccorohaṇīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the noble descent. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is the noble descent? It's when a noble disciple
reflects: 'Killing living creatures has a bad result in the present life
and in lives to come.' Reflecting like this, they give up killing living
creatures, they descend from killing living creatures.

... 'Stealing has a bad result in the present life and in lives to
come.' Reflecting like this, they give up stealing, they descend from
stealing.

... 'Sexual misconduct has a bad result ...' ... they descend from
sexual misconduct.

... 'Lying has a bad result ...' ... they descend from lying.

... 'Divisive speech has a bad result ...' ... they descend from
divisive speech.

... 'Harsh speech has a bad result ...' ... they descend from harsh
speech.

... 'Talking nonsense has a bad result ...' ... they descend from
talking nonsense.

... 'Covetousness has a bad result ...' ... they descend from
covetousness.

... 'Ill will has a bad result ...' ... they descend from ill will.

... 'Wrong view has a bad result both in the present life and in lives
to come.' Reflecting like this, they give up wrong view, they descend
from wrong view. This is called the noble descent."

</article>
<article id="an10.169">

#### [AN 10.169]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Saṅgārava ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅgāravasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, what is the near shore? And what is the far shore?"

"Killing living creatures is the near shore, brahmin, and not killing
living creatures is the far shore. Stealing is the near shore, and not
stealing is the far shore. Sexual misconduct is the near shore, and
avoiding sexual misconduct is the far shore. Lying is the near shore,
and not lying is the far shore. Divisive speech is the near shore, and
avoiding divisive speech is the far shore. Harsh speech is the near
shore, and avoiding harsh speech is the far shore. Talking nonsense is
the near shore, and avoiding talking nonsense is the far shore.
Covetousness is the near shore, and contentment is the far shore. Ill
will is the near shore, and good will is the far shore. Wrong view is
the near shore, and right view is the far shore. This is the near shore,
and this is the far shore.

> Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's domain so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

</article>
<article id="an10.170">

#### [AN 10.170]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Near Shore ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Orimasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak. ... And what, mendicants, is the
near shore? What is the far shore? Killing living creatures is the near
shore, mendicants, and not killing living creatures is the far shore.
Stealing is the near shore, and not stealing is the far shore. Sexual
misconduct is the near shore, and avoiding sexual misconduct is the far
shore. Lying is the near shore, and not lying is the far shore. Divisive
speech is the near shore, and avoiding divisive speech is the far shore.
Harsh speech is the near shore, and avoiding harsh speech is the far
shore. Talking nonsense is the near shore, and avoiding talking nonsense
is the far shore. Covetousness is the near shore, and contentment is the
far shore. Ill will is the near shore, and good will is the far shore.
Wrong view is the near shore, and right view is the far shore. This is
the near shore, and this is the far shore.

> Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's domain so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

</article>
<article id="an10.171">

#### [AN 10.171]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles with bad results. And you
should know good principles with good results. Knowing these things,
your practice should follow the good principles with good results.

And what are bad principles with bad results? Killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. These are called
bad principles with bad results.

And what are good principles with good results? Avoiding killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will, and
right view. These are called good principles with good results.

'You should know bad principles with bad results. And you should know
good principles with good results. Knowing these things, your practice
should follow the good principles with good results.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.172">

#### [AN 10.172]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you
should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your
practice should follow the good principles with good results."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. 'You should know bad principles and
good principles. And you should know bad results and good results.
Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles
with good results.' Who can explain in detail the meaning of this brief
summary recital given by the Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought, "This Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by
the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is
capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary
recital given by the Buddha. Let's go to him, and ask him about this
matter. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

Then those mendicants went to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with
him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down
to one side. They told him what had happened, and said, "May Venerable
Mahākaccāna please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves. Such is the
consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the
Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me about this
matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer. Still, Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha
and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable of
explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by
the Buddha. Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Mahākaccāna said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail: 'You should know bad
principles and good principles ... and practice accordingly.'

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad
results? And what are good results? Killing living creatures is a bad
principle. Not killing living creatures is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by killing living creatures are
bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
not killing living creatures are good results.

Stealing is a bad principle. Not stealing is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by stealing are bad results. And
the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not stealing are
good results.

Sexual misconduct is a bad principle. Avoiding sexual misconduct is a
good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by
sexual misconduct are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully
developed because of avoiding sexual misconduct are good results.

Lying is a bad principle. Not lying is a good principle. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities produced by lying are bad results. And the
many skillful qualities fully developed because of not lying are good
results.

Divisive speech is a bad principle. Avoiding divisive speech is a good
principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by divisive
speech are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed
because of avoiding divisive speech are good results.

Harsh speech is a bad principle. Avoiding harsh speech is a good
principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by harsh
speech are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed
because of avoiding harsh speech are good results.

Talking nonsense is a bad principle. Avoiding talking nonsense is a good
principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by talking
nonsense are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully
developed because of avoiding talking nonsense are good results.

Covetousness is a bad principle. Contentment is a good principle. And
the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by covetousness are bad
results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
contentment are good results.

Ill will is a bad principle. Good will is a good principle. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities produced by ill will are bad results. And the
many skillful qualities fully developed because of good will are good
results.

Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.
And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view
are good results.

The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling
without explaining the meaning in detail: 'You should know bad
principles and good principles ... and practice accordingly.' And this
is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital. If you
wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

"Yes, reverend," said those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what
Mahākaccāna said. Then they rose from their seats and went to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.
Then they said:

"Sir, we went to Mahākaccāna and asked him about this matter. And
Mahākaccāna clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with
these words and phrases."

"Good, good, mendicants! Mahākaccāna is astute, he has great wisdom. If
you came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the
same way as Mahākaccāna. That is what it means, and that's how you
should remember it."

</article>
<article id="an10.173">

#### [AN 10.173]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Principles (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you
should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your
practice should follow the good principles with good results.

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad
results? And what are good results? Killing living creatures is a bad
principle. Not killing living creatures is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by killing living creatures are
bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of
not killing living creatures are good results.

Stealing is a bad principle. Not stealing is a good principle. ...
Sexual misconduct is a bad principle. Avoiding sexual misconduct is a
good principle. ... Lying is a bad principle. Not lying is a good
principle. ... Divisive speech is a bad principle. Avoiding divisive
speech is a good principle. ... Harsh speech is a bad principle.
Avoiding harsh speech is a good principle. ... Talking nonsense is a bad
principle. Avoiding talking nonsense is a good principle. ...
Covetousness is a bad principle. Contentment is a good principle. ...
Ill will is a bad principle. Good will is a good principle. ...

Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.
And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view
are good results.

'You should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know
bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should
follow the good principles with good results.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it."

</article>
<article id="an10.174">

#### [AN 10.174]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sources of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kammanidānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I say that killing living creatures is threefold: caused by
greed, hate, or delusion.

I say that stealing is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

I say that sexual misconduct is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or
delusion.

I say that lying is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

I say that divisive speech is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or
delusion.

I say that harsh speech is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or
delusion.

I say that talking nonsense is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or
delusion.

I say that covetousness is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or
delusion.

I say that ill will is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

I say that wrong view is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.
And so greed, hate, and delusion are sources and origins for deeds. With
the ending of greed, hate, and delusion, the sources of deeds are
ended."

</article>
<article id="an10.175">

#### [AN 10.175]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Bypass ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parikkamanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, this teaching provides a bypass, it doesn't lack a bypass.
And how does this teaching provide a bypass, not lacking a bypass? Not
killing living creatures bypasses killing living creatures. Not stealing
bypasses stealing. Avoiding sexual misconduct bypasses sexual
misconduct. Not lying bypasses lying. Avoiding divisive speech bypasses
divisive speech. Avoiding harsh speech bypasses harsh speech. Avoiding
talking nonsense bypasses talking nonsense. Contentment bypasses
covetousness. Good will bypasses ill will. Right view bypasses wrong
view. That's how this teaching provides a bypass, it doesn't lack a
bypass."

</article>
<article id="an10.176">

#### [AN 10.176]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Cunda ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cundasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near Pāvā
in Cunda the smith's mango grove. Then Cunda the smith went to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Cunda,
whose purity do you believe in?"

"Sir, I believe in the purity advocated by the western brahmins draped
with moss who carry pitchers, serve the sacred flame, and immerse
themselves in water."

"But Cunda, what kind of purity do these western brahmins advocate?"

"The western brahmins encourage their disciples like this: 'Please, good
people, rising early you should stroke the earth from your bed. If you
don't stroke the earth, stroke fresh cow dung. If you don't stroke fresh
cow dung, stroke green grass. If you don't stroke green grass, serve the
sacred flame. If you don't serve the sacred flame, revere the sun with
joined palms. If you don't revere the sun with joined palms, immerse
yourself in water three times, including the evening.' The western
brahmins advocate this kind of purity."

"The purity advocated by the western brahmins is quite different from
that in the training of the Noble One."

"But what, sir, is purity in the training of the Noble One? Sir, please
teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Cunda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Cunda, impurity is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech,
and threefold by way of mind.

And how is impurity threefold by way of body? It's when a certain person
kills living creatures. They're violent, bloody-handed, a hardened
killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who
have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman
who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation
is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

This is the threefold impurity by way of body.

And how is impurity fourfold by way of speech? It's when a certain
person lies. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family
meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness:
'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I know.'
Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I see.' And
seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for the sake of
themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor
beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training.
Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and
pointless. This is the fourfold impurity by way of speech.

And how is impurity threefold by way of mind? It's when a certain person
is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh, if
only their belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.' This is the threefold impurity by way of mind.

These are the ten ways of doing unskillful deeds. When you have these
ten ways of doing unskillful deeds, then if you rise early, whether or
not you stroke the earth from your bed, you're still impure.

Whether or not you stroke fresh cow dung, you're still impure.

Whether or not you stroke green grass, you're still impure.

Whether or not you serve the sacred flame, you're still impure.

Whether or not you revere the sun with joined palms, you're still
impure.

Whether or not you immerse yourself in water three times, you're still
impure. Why is that? These ten ways of doing unskillful deeds are impure
and make things impure.

It's because of those who do these ten kinds of unskillful deeds that
hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are
found.

Cunda, purity is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech,
and threefold by way of mind.

And how is purity threefold by way of body? It's when a certain person
gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword.
They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living
beings.

They give up stealing. They don't, with the intention to commit theft,
take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sexual relations with
women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother,
sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sexual relations
with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or
whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded
as a token of betrothal.

This is the threefold purity by way of body.

And how is purity fourfold by way of speech? It's when a certain person
gives up lying. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family
meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness:
'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I don't
know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I don't see.'
And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they don't deliberately lie for the
sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

This is the fourfold purity by way of speech.

And how is purity threefold by way of mind? It's when a certain person
is content. They don't covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh,
if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

This is the threefold purity by way of mind.

These are the ten ways of doing skillful deeds. When you have these ten
ways of doing skillful deeds, then if you rise early, whether or not you
stroke the earth from your bed, you're still pure.

Whether or not you stroke fresh cow dung, you're still pure.

Whether or not you stroke green grass, you're still pure.

Whether or not you serve the sacred flame, you're still pure.

Whether or not you revere the sun with joined palms, you're still pure.

Whether or not you immerse yourself in water three times, you're still
pure. Why is that? These ten ways of doing skillful deeds are pure and
make things pure.

It's because of those who do these ten kinds of skillful deeds that
gods, humans, or any other good places are found."

When he said this, Cunda the smith said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

</article>
<article id="an10.177">

#### [AN 10.177]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Jānussoṇi ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jāṇussoṇisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha, "We who are known as brahmins give gifts
and perform memorial rites for the dead: 'May this gift aid my departed
relatives and kin. May they partake of this gift.' But does this gift
really aid departed relatives and kin? Do they actually partake of it?"

"It aids them if the conditions are right, brahmin, but not if the
conditions are wrong."

"Then, Mister Gotama, what are the right and wrong conditions?"

"Brahmin, take someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits
sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in hell. There they
survive feeding on the food of the hell beings. The conditions there are
wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

Take someone else who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the animal
realm. There they survive feeding on the food of the beings in the
animal realm. The conditions there too are wrong, so the gift does not
aid the one who lives there.

Take someone else who doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit
sexual misconduct, or use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. They\'re contented, kind-hearted, and have right view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the human realm.
There they survive feeding on human food. The conditions there too are
wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

Take someone else who doesn't kill living creatures ... and has right
view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the
company of the gods. There they survive feeding on the food of the gods.
The conditions there too are wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who
lives there.

Take someone else who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the ghost
realm. There they survive feeding on the food of the beings in the ghost
realm. Or else they survive feeding on what friends and colleagues,
relatives and kin provide them with from here. The conditions there are
right, so the gift aids the one who lives there."

"But Mister Gotama, who partakes of that gift if the departed relative
is not reborn in that place?"

"Other departed relatives reborn there will partake of that gift."

"But who partakes of the gift when neither that relative nor other
relatives have been reborn in that place?"

"It's impossible, brahmin, it cannot happen that that place is vacant of
departed relatives in all this long time. It's never fruitless for the
donor."

"Does Mister Gotama propose this even when the conditions are wrong?"

"I propose this even when the conditions are wrong. Take someone who
kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
covetous, malicious, with wrong view. They give to ascetics or brahmins
such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of elephants. There they get to
have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

Since in this life they killed living creatures ... and had wrong view,
they were reborn in the company of elephants. Since they gave to
ascetics or brahmins ... they get to have food and drink, garlands and
various adornments.

Take someone else who kills living creatures ... and has wrong view.
They give to ascetics or brahmins ... When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of horses. ... cattle ... dogs.
There they get to have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

Since in this life they killed living creatures ... and had wrong view,
they were reborn in the company of dogs. Since they gave to ascetics or
brahmins ... they get to have food and drink, garlands and various
adornments.

Take someone else who doesn't kill living creatures, steal, or commit
sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted, with right view.
They give to ascetics or brahmins ... When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the human realm. There they get to have the
five kinds of human sensual stimulation.

Since in this life they didn't kill living creatures ... and had right
view, they were reborn in the company of humans. Since they gave to
ascetics or brahmins ... they get to have the five kinds of human
sensual stimulation.

Take someone else who doesn't kill living creatures ... and has right
view. They give to ascetics or brahmins ... When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods. There they get
to have the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation.

Since in this life they didn't kill living creatures ... and had right
view, they were reborn in the company of the gods. Since they gave to
ascetics or brahmins ... they get to have the five kinds of heavenly
sensual stimulation. It's never fruitless for the donor."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, This is quite enough to
justify giving gifts and performing memorial rites for the dead, since
it's never fruitless for the donor."

"That's so true, brahmin. It's never fruitless for the donor."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>

[]{#an10-catutthapannasaka-sadhuvagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Good {#an10-catutthapannasaka-sadhuvagga.xhtml_an10-catutthapannasaka-sadhuvagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.178">

#### [AN 10.178]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sādhusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is not good? Killing living creatures, stealing,
and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. This is called what
is not good.

And what is good? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing, and
sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view. This is called what
is good."

</article>
<article id="an10.179">

#### [AN 10.179]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching of the Noble Ones ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the noble ones, and what
is not the teaching of the noble ones. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak. ... And what is not the teaching of the noble ones?
Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called what is not the
teaching of the noble ones.

And what is the teaching of the noble ones? Not killing living creatures
... right view. This is called the teaching of the noble ones."

</article>
<article id="an10.180">

#### [AN 10.180]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Skillful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kusalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the skillful and the unskillful ... And what is the
unskillful? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
unskillful.

And what is the skillful? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the skillful."

</article>
<article id="an10.181">

#### [AN 10.181]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Beneficial ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the beneficial and the harmful. ... And what is the
harmful? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
harmful.

And what is the beneficial? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the beneficial."

</article>
<article id="an10.182">

#### [AN 10.182]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you what is the teaching and what is not the teaching. ...
And what is not the teaching? Killing living creatures ... wrong view.
This is called what is not the teaching.

And what is the teaching? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the teaching."

</article>
<article id="an10.183">

#### [AN 10.183]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Defiled ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the defiled principle and the undefiled. ... And what
is the defiled principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This
is called the defiled principle.

And what is the undefiled principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the undefiled principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.184">

#### [AN 10.184]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Blameworthy ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vajjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the blameworthy principle and the blameless. ... And
what is the blameworthy principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong
view. This is called the blameworthy principle.

And what is the blameless principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the blameless principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.185">

#### [AN 10.185]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mortifying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tapanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the mortifying principle and the unmortifying. ... And
what is the mortifying principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong
view. This is called the mortifying principle.

And what is the unmortifying principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the unmortifying principle."

</article>
<article id="an10.186">

#### [AN 10.186]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Leading to Accumulation ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ācayagāmisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that leads to accumulation and that
which leads to dispersal. ... And what is the principle that leads to
accumulation? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called
the principle that leads to accumulation.

And what is the principle that leads to dispersal? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is called the principle that leads to
dispersal."

</article>
<article id="an10.187">

#### [AN 10.187]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Suffering as Outcome ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhudrayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that has suffering as outcome, and that
which has happiness as outcome. ... And what is the principle whose
outcome is suffering? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is
the principle whose outcome is suffering.

And what is the principle whose outcome is happiness? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is the principle whose outcome is
happiness."

</article>
<article id="an10.188">

#### [AN 10.188]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Result ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vipākasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle that results in suffering and that which
results in happiness. ... And what is the principle that results in
suffering? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
principle that results in suffering.

And what is the principle that results in happiness? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is called the principle that results in
happiness."

</article>

[]{#an10-ariyamaggavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on the Noble Path {#an10-ariyamaggavagga.xhtml_an10-ariyamaggavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.189">

#### [AN 10.189]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Noble Path ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ariyamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path. ... And what is
the ignoble path? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is
called the ignoble path.

And what is the noble path? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the noble path."

</article>
<article id="an10.190">

#### [AN 10.190]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Dark Path ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kaṇhamaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the dark path and the bright path. ... And what is the
dark path? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
dark path.

And what is the bright path? Not killing living creatures ... right
view. This is called the bright path."

</article>
<article id="an10.191">

#### [AN 10.191]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The True Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you what is the true teaching and what is not the true
teaching. ... And what is not the true teaching? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called what is not the true teaching.

And what is the true teaching? Not killing living creatures ... right
view. This is called the true teaching."

</article>
<article id="an10.192">

#### [AN 10.192]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Teaching of the True Persons ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sappurisadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the true persons and the
teaching of the untrue persons. And what is the teaching of the untrue
persons? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is the teaching
of the untrue persons.

And what is the teaching of the true persons? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is the teaching of the true persons."

</article>
<article id="an10.193">

#### [AN 10.193]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Principles That Should Be Activated ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Uppādetabbadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to activate and the principle not to
activate. ... And what is the principle not to activate? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to activate.

And what is the principle to activate? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to activate."

</article>
<article id="an10.194">

#### [AN 10.194]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Principles That Should Be Cultivated ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsevitabbadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to cultivate and the principle not to
cultivate. ... And what is the principle not to cultivate? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
cultivate.

And what is the principle to cultivate? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to cultivate."

</article>
<article id="an10.195">

#### [AN 10.195]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Principles That Should Be Developed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhāvetabbadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to develop and the principle not to
develop. ... Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. And what is
the principle not to develop? Killing living creatures ... wrong view.
This is called the principle not to develop.

And what is the principle to develop? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to develop."

</article>
<article id="an10.196">

#### [AN 10.196]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Principles That Should Be Made Much Of ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahulīkātabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to make much of and the principle not to
make much of. ... And what is the principle not to make much of? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
make much of.

And what is the principle to make much of? Not killing living creatures
... right view. This is called the principle to make much of."

</article>
<article id="an10.197">

#### [AN 10.197]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Recollected ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Anussaritabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to recollect and the principle not to
recollect. ... And what is the principle not to recollect? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
recollect.

And what is the principle to recollect? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to recollect."

</article>
<article id="an10.198">

#### [AN 10.198]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Be Realized ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sacchikātabbasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"I will teach you the principle to realize and the principle not to
realize. ... And what is the principle not to realize? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to realize.

And what is the principle to realize? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to realize."

</article>

[]{#an10-ariyapuggalavagga.xhtml}

### Another Chapter on Persons {#an10-ariyapuggalavagga.xhtml_an10-ariyapuggalavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.199-210">

#### [AN 10.199--210]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Should Not Associate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aparapuggalavagga]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you should not associate with a person who has ten
qualities. What ten? They kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. You
should not associate with a person who has these ten qualities.

You should associate with a person who has ten qualities. What ten? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. You should associate with a
person who has these ten qualities."

"Mendicants, you should not frequent a person who has ten qualities. you
should frequent ... you should not pay homage ... you should pay homage
... you should not venerate ... you should venerate ... you should not
praise ... you should praise ... you should not revere ... you should
revere ... you should not defer to ... you should defer to ... is not a
success ... is a success ... is not pure ... is pure ... does not win
over conceit ... wins over conceit ... does not grow in wisdom ... grows
in wisdom ...

A person who has these ten qualities creates much wickedness. ...
creates much merit. What ten? They don't kill living creatures, steal,
or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're contented, kind-hearted, with
right view. A person who has these ten qualities creates much merit."

</article>

[]{#an10-pancamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The Fifth Fifty {#an10-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an10-pancamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on the Body Born of Deeds {#an10-pancamapannasaka.xhtml_an10-karajakayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.211">

#### [AN 10.211]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Heaven and Hell (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamanirayasaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? It's when a
certain person kills living creatures. They're violent, bloody-handed, a
hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who
have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman
who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation
is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

They lie. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting,
a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: 'Please,
mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I know.' Knowing,
they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I see.' And seeing, they
say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves
or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor
beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training.
Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and
pointless.

They're covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh,
if only their belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.' Someone with these ten qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They don't, with the intention to commit theft,
take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sex with women who have
their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sex with a woman who is
protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is
punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

They give up lying. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family
meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness:
'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I don't
know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I don't see.'
And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they don't deliberately lie for the
sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They're content. They don't covet the wealth and belongings of others:
'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

Someone with these ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.212">

#### [AN 10.212]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Heaven and Hell (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyanirayasaggasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? It's when a
certain person kills living creatures. They're violent, bloody-handed, a
hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. ... They commit sexual misconduct. ... They lie. ... They
speak divisively. ... They speak harshly. ... They indulge in talking
nonsense. ... They're covetous. ... They have cruel intentions. ... They
have wrong view. ... Someone with these ten qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. ... They give up sexual misconduct. ... They give
up lying. ... They give up divisive speech. ... They give up harsh
speech. ... They give up talking nonsense. ... They're content. ...
They're kind hearted. ... They have right view. ... Someone with these
ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.213">

#### [AN 10.213]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Female ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mātugāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A female with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? She kills
living creatures. ... She steals. ... She commits sexual misconduct. ...
She lies. ... She speaks divisively. ... She speaks harshly. ... She
indulges in talking nonsense. ... She's covetous. ... She has cruel
intentions. ... She has wrong view. ... A female with these ten
qualities is cast down to hell.

A female with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? She
doesn't kill living creatures. ... She doesn't steal. ... She doesn't
commit sexual misconduct. ... She doesn't lie. ... She doesn't speak
divisively. ... She doesn't speak harshly. ... She doesn't indulge in
talking nonsense. ... She's content. ... She's kind hearted. ... She has
right view. ... A female with these ten qualities is raised up to
heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.214">

#### [AN 10.214]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Laywoman ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upāsikāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A laywoman with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? She kills
living creatures. ... She has wrong view. ... A laywoman with these ten
qualities is cast down to hell.

A laywoman with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? She
doesn't kill living creatures. ... She has right view. ... A laywoman
with these ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.215">

#### [AN 10.215]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Assured ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Visāradasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured.
What ten? She kills living creatures. ... She has wrong view. ... A
laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured.

A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured. What
ten? She doesn't kill living creatures. ... She has right view. ... A
laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured."

</article>
<article id="an10.216">

#### [AN 10.216]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Creepy Creatures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁsappanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on creepy
creatures. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is the exposition of the teaching on creepy creatures? Sentient
beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are
their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be the heir of
whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.

Take a certain person who kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. They're
creepy in body, speech, and mind. Doing crooked deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind, their destiny and rebirth are crooked.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is crooked is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in an exclusively painful hell, or among the species of
creepy animals. And what are the species of creepy animals? Snakes,
scorpions, centipedes, mongooses, cats, mice, owls, or whatever other
species of animal that creep away when they see humans. This is how a
being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and
when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient
beings are heirs to their deeds.

Take someone else who steals ... commits sexual misconduct ... lies ...
speaks divisively ... speaks harshly ... indulges in talking nonsense
... is covetous ... has cruel intentions ... has wrong view ... They're
creepy in body, speech, and mind. Doing crooked deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind, their destiny and rebirth are crooked.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is crooked is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in an exclusively painful hell, or among the species of
creepy animals. And what are the species of creepy animals? Snakes,
scorpions, centipedes, mongooses, cats, mice, owls, or whatever other
species of animal that creep away when they see humans. This is how a
being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and
when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient
beings are heirs to their deeds. Sentient beings are the owners of their
deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and
their refuge. They shall be the heir of whatever deeds they do, whether
good or bad.

Take a certain person who gives up killing living creatures. They
renounce the rod and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full
of sympathy for all living beings. They're not creepy in body, speech,
and mind. Doing virtuous deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, their
destiny and rebirth is virtuous.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is virtuous is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in a heaven of perfect happiness, or in an eminent
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. This is how a being is born
from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and when you're
reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient beings are
heirs to their deeds.

Take someone else who gives up stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying
... divisive speech ... harsh speech ... talking nonsense ... They're
content ... kind hearted ... they have right view ... They're not creepy
in body, speech, and mind. Doing virtuous deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind, their destiny and rebirth is virtuous.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is virtuous is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in a heaven of perfect happiness, or in an eminent
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. This is how a being is born
from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and when you're
reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient beings are
heirs to their deeds.

Sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds.
Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be
the heir of whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad. This is the
exposition of the teaching on creepy creatures."

</article>
<article id="an10.217">

#### [AN 10.217]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Intentional (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasañcetanikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent
period. And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing
intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action?
It's when a certain person kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sex with women who have their
mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or
clan as guardian. They have sex with a woman who is protected on
principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by
law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal.

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action?
It's when a certain person lies. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for
the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They indulge in talking nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is
neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching
or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely,
unreasonable, rambling, and pointless.

These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action?
It's when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of
others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three
kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of
corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of
corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention,
with suffering as their outcome and result.

It's like throwing unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up.
In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because
of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these
four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three
kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful
intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed and
accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in
the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And
I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional
deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have
skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There
are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention,
with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of
successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as
their outcome and result.

And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They don't steal. They don't, with the intention to commit theft, take
the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sex with women who have
their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sex with a woman who is
protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is
punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

These are the three kinds of successful bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? It's when a
certain person gives up lying. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I don't know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
don't see.' And seeing, they say 'I see.' They don't deliberately lie
for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly
reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

These are the four kinds of successful verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? It's when
someone is content. They don't covet the wealth and belongings of
others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

These are the three kinds of successful mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily
action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three
kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with
happiness as their outcome and result.

It's like throwing unfaling dice: they always fall the right side up. In
the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings
are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of
successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action,
or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful
intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. I don't say that
intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are
eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present
life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don't say
that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have
been performed and accumulated."

</article>
<article id="an10.218">

#### [AN 10.218]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Intentional (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasañcetanikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent
period. And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing
intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action?
... These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily
action.

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action?
... These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action?
... These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental
action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three
kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of
corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of
corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention,
with suffering as their outcome and result.

I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed and
accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in
the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And
I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional
deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have
skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There
are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention,
with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of
successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as
their outcome and result.

And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? ... These are
the three kinds of successful bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? ... These are
the four kinds of successful verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? ... These are
the three kinds of successful mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily
action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three
kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with
happiness as their outcome and result. ..."

</article>
<article id="an10.219">

#### [AN 10.219]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Body Born of Deeds ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Karajakāyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent
period. And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing
intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

That noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They understand: 'Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it's
limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I've done don't
remain or persist there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Suppose a child had developed the heart's
release by love from their childhood on. Would they still do any bad
deed?"

"No, sir."

"Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?"

"No, sir. For if they don't do any bad deed, from where would suffering
afflict them?"

"This heart's release by love should be developed by women or men. For
neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. The mind is
what's inside mortal beings. They understand: 'Whatever bad deeds I have
done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience here. It
will not follow me to my next life.' The heart's release by love
developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise mendicant here who
has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate spreading a heart
full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.

They understand: 'Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it's
limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I've done don't
remain or persist there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Suppose a child had developed the heart's
release by equanimity from their childhood on. Would they still do any
bad deed?"

"No, sir."

"Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?"

"No, sir. For if they don't do any bad deed, from where would suffering
afflict them?"

"This heart's release by equanimity should be developed by women or men.
For neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. The
mind is what's inside mortal beings. They understand: 'Whatever bad
deeds I have done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience
here. It will not follow me to my next life.' The heart's release by
equanimity developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise
mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom."

</article>
<article id="an10.220">

#### [AN 10.220]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Unprincipled Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Adhammacariyāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"But what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm."

"I don't understand the detailed meaning of what Mister Gotama has said
in brief. Please, Mister Gotama, teach me this matter so I can
understand the detailed meaning."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," the brahmin replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body,
fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of
body.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of
speech.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of
mind. That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

Principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by
way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body.

And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind.
That's how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

</article>

[]{#an10-samannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Similarity {#an10-samannavagga.xhtml_an10-samannavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.221">

#### [AN 10.221]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Ten Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? They kill
living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. Someone with these ten qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't
use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. Someone with these ten
qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.222">

#### [AN 10.222]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Twenty Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with twenty qualities is cast down to hell. What twenty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. And they encourage others to do these
things. Someone with these twenty qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with twenty qualities is raised up to heaven. What twenty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to
do these things. Someone with these twenty qualities is raised up to
heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.223">

#### [AN 10.223]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Thirty Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with thirty qualities is cast down to hell. What thirty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. They encourage others to do these things.
And they approve of these things. Someone with these thirty qualities is
cast down to hell.

Someone with thirty qualities is raised up to heaven. What thirty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. They encourage others to do
these things. And they approve of these things. Someone with these
thirty qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.224">

#### [AN 10.224]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Forty Qualities ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with forty qualities is cast down to hell. What forty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. They encourage others to do these things.
They approve of these things. And they praise these things. Someone with
these forty qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with forty qualities is raised up to heaven. What forty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. They encourage others to do
these things. They approve of these things. And they praise these
things. Someone with these forty qualities is raised up to heaven."

</article>
<article id="an10.225-228">

#### [AN 10.225--228]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Someone with ten qualities keeps themselves broken and damaged ...
keeps themselves healthy and whole ... twenty ... thirty ... forty ..."

</article>
<article id="an10.229-232">

#### [AN 10.229--232]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"When they have ten qualities, some people, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. ... some people, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm ... twenty ... thirty ... forty
..."

</article>
<article id="an10.233-236">

#### [AN 10.233--236]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"A fool is known by ten qualities ... astute person ... twenty ...
thirty ... forty ..."

</article>

[]{#an10-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an10-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an10-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an10.237">

#### [AN 10.237]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction
with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and
not-self in suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation. For
insight into greed, these ten things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an10.238">

#### [AN 10.238]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? The
perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food,
dissatisfaction with the whole world, a skeleton, a worm-infested
corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse, and a bloated corpse. For
insight into greed, these ten things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an10.239">

#### [AN 10.239]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. For insight into greed, these ten things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an10.240-266">

#### [AN 10.240--266]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ... these ten things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an10.267-746">

#### [AN 10.267--746]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
the complete understanding of negligence ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of negligence ... these ten things should be
developed."

The Book of the Tens is finished.

</article>

[]{#an11.xhtml}

# The Book of the Elevens {#an11.xhtml_an11 .section-title .heading}

[]{#an11-pathamapannasaka.xhtml}

## The First Fifty {#an11-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an11-pathamapannasaka .section-title .heading .pannasaka-heading}

### The Chapter on Dependence {#an11-pathamapannasaka.xhtml_an11-nissayavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an11.1">

#### [AN 11.1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [What's the Purpose? ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kimatthiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

[So I have heard. ]{.evam}At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics?"

"Ānanda, having no regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful
ethics."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets?"

"Joy is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of joy?"

"Rapture ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of rapture?"

"Tranquility ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?"

"Bliss ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of bliss?"

"Immersion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of immersion?"

"Truly knowing and seeing ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?"

"Disillusionment ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment?"

"Dispassion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of dispassion?"

"Knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of
dispassion.

So, Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics is not having
regrets. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Rapture
is the purpose and benefit of joy. Tranquility is the purpose and
benefit of rapture. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility.
Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. Truly knowing and seeing
is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Disillusionment is the purpose
and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Dispassion is the purpose and
benefit of disillusionment. And knowledge and vision of freedom is the
purpose and benefit of dispassion. So, Ānanda, skillful ethics
progressively lead up to the highest."

</article>
<article id="an11.2">

#### [AN 11.2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Making a Wish ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cetanākaraṇīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need
not make a wish: 'May I have no regrets!' It's only natural that an
ethical person has no regrets.

When you have no regrets you need not make a wish: 'May I feel joy!'
It's only natural that joy springs up when you have no regrets.

When you feel joy you need not make a wish: 'May I experience rapture!'
It's only natural that rapture arises when you're joyful.

When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a wish: 'May my body
become tranquil!' It's only natural that your body becomes tranquil when
your mind is full of rapture.

When your body is tranquil you need not make a wish: 'May I feel bliss!'
It's only natural to feel bliss when your body is tranquil.

When you feel bliss you need not make a wish: 'May my mind be immersed
in samādhi!' It's only natural for the mind to become immersed in
samādhi when you feel bliss.

When your mind is immersed in samādhi you need not make a wish: 'May I
truly know and see!' It's only natural to truly know and see when your
mind is immersed in samādhi.

When you truly know and see you need not make a wish: 'May I grow
disillusioned!' It's only natural to grow disillusioned when you truly
know and see.

When you're disillusioned you need not make a wish: 'May I become
dispassionate!' It's only natural to grow dispassionate when you're
disillusioned.

When you're dispassionate you need not make a wish: 'May I realize the
knowledge and vision of freedom!' It's only natural to realize the
knowledge and vision of freedom when you're dispassionate.

And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose
and benefit of dispassion. Dispassion is the purpose and benefit of
disillusionment. Disillusionment is the purpose and benefit of truly
knowing and seeing. Truly knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit
of immersion. Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. Bliss is
the purpose and benefit of tranquility. Tranquility is the purpose and
benefit of rapture. Rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy. Joy is
the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Not having regrets is the
purpose and benefit of skillful ethics. And so, mendicants, good
qualities flow on and fill up from one to the other, for going from the
near shore to the far shore."

</article>
<article id="an11.3">

#### [AN 11.3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaupanisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no
joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When
there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital
condition for tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks
tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no
bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right
immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right
immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.
When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge
and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment. When
there is no disillusionment, one who lacks disillusionment has destroyed
a vital condition for dispassion. When there is no dispassion, one who
lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and
vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... When there is
no dispassion, one who lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment. When there is disillusionment, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment has fulfilled a vital condition for
dispassion. When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion
has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an11.4">

#### [AN 11.4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaupanisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"An unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition
for not having regrets. When there are regrets, one who has regrets has
destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no joy, one who lacks
joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When there is no
rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for
tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has
destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no bliss, one who
lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. When
there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed
a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is no true
knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has
destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment. When there is no
disillusionment, one who lacks disillusionment has destroyed a vital
condition for dispassion. When there is no dispassion, one who lacks
dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... When there is
dispassion, one who lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment. When there is disillusionment, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment has fulfilled a vital condition for
dispassion. When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion
has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an11.5">

#### [AN 11.5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Vital Conditions (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyaupanisāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Venerable Ānanda addressed the mendicants ...

"An unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition
for not having regrets. When there are regrets, one who has regrets has
destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no joy, one who lacks
joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When there is no
rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for
tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has
destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no bliss, one who
lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. When
there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed
a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is no true
knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has
destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment. When there is no
disillusionment, one who lacks disillusionment has destroyed a vital
condition for dispassion. When there is no dispassion, one who lacks
dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... When there is
no dispassion, one who lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment. When there is disillusionment, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment has fulfilled a vital condition for
dispassion. When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion
has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

</article>
<article id="an11.6">

#### [AN 11.6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disasters ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Byasanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, any mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual
companions, speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall
into one or other of these eleven disasters. What eleven?

They don't achieve the unachieved. What they have achieved falls away.
They don't refine their good qualities. They overestimate their good
qualities. Or they lead the spiritual life dissatisfied. Or they commit
a corrupt offense. Or they resign the training and return to a lesser
life. Or they contract a severe illness. Or they go mad and lose their
mind. They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

Any mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual companions,
speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, fall into one or
other of these eleven disasters.

Any mendicant who does not abuse and insult their spiritual companions,
speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, not fall into one
or other of these eleven disasters. What eleven?

They don't achieve the unachieved. What they have achieved falls away.
They don't refine their good qualities. They overestimate their good
qualities. Or they lead the spiritual life dissatisfied. Or they commit
one of the corrupt offenses. Or they resign the training and return to a
lesser life. Or they contract a severe illness. Or they go mad and lose
their mind. They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up,
after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Any mendicant who does not abuse and insult their spiritual companions,
speaking ill of the noble ones, will, without a doubt, not fall into one
or other of these eleven disasters."

</article>
<article id="an11.7">

#### [AN 11.7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Percipient ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in
fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"But how could this be, sir?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They
wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air
in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of infinite space in
the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness
in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness
in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world in this world, or the
other world in the other world. And they wouldn't perceive what is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And
yet they would still perceive."

And then Ānanda approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right. Then he went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

"Could it be, reverend Sāriputta, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth ... And they
wouldn't perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought,
or explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, Reverend Ānanda."

"But how could this be?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth ... And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It's incredible, it's amazing! How the meaning and the phrasing of the
teacher and the disciple fit together and agree without conflict when it
comes to the chief matter! Just now I went to the Buddha and asked him
about this matter. And the Buddha explained it to me in this manner,
with these words and phrases, just like Venerable Sāriputta. It's
incredible, it's amazing! How the meaning and the phrasing of the
teacher and the disciple fit together and agree without conflict when it
comes to the chief matter!"

</article>
<article id="an11.8">

#### [AN 11.8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Focus ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Manasikārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this. They wouldn't focus on the eye or sights, ear or sounds, nose or
smells, tongue or tastes, or body or touches. They wouldn't focus on
earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they
wouldn't focus on the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of
infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension
of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension
of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. They wouldn't focus on this world in this world, or the
other world in the other world. And they wouldn't focus on what is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. Yet
they would focus?"

"It could be, Ānanda."

"But how could this be?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant focuses thus: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They
wouldn't focus on the eye or sights, ear or sounds, nose or smells,
tongue or tastes, or body or touches. ... And they wouldn't focus on
what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by
the mind. Yet they would focus."

</article>
<article id="an11.9">

#### [AN 11.9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Sandha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saddhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house.

Then Venerable Sandha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Sandha, meditate like a thoroughbred, not like a wild colt.

And how does a wild colt meditate? A wild colt, tied up by the feeding
trough, meditates: 'Fodder, fodder!' Why is that? Because it doesn't
occur to the wild colt tied up by the feeding trough: 'What task will
the horse trainer have me do today? How should I respond?' Tied up by
the feeding trough they just meditate: 'Fodder, fodder!'

In the same way, take a certain wild person who has gone to the forest,
the root of a tree, or an empty hut. Their heart is overcome and mired
in sensual desire, and they don't truly understand the escape from
sensual desire that has arisen. Harboring sensual desire within they
meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. Their heart is
overcome by ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and
remorse ... doubt ... Harboring doubt within they meditate and
concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. They meditate dependent on
earth, water, fire, and air. They meditate dependent on the dimension of
infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither
perception nor non-perception. They meditate dependent on this world or
the other world. They meditate dependent on what is seen, heard,
thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. That's how a
wild colt meditates.

And how does a thoroughbred meditate? A fine thoroughbred, tied up by
the feeding trough, doesn't meditate: 'Fodder, fodder!' Why is that?
Because it occurs to the fine thoroughbred tied up by the feeding
trough: 'What task will the horse trainer have me do today? How should I
respond?' Tied up by the feeding trough they don't meditate: 'Fodder,
fodder!' For that fine thoroughbred regards the use of the goad as a
debt, a bond, a loss, a misfortune.

In the same way, take a certain fine thoroughbred person who has gone to
the forest, the root of a tree, or an empty hut. Their heart is not
overcome and mired in sensual desire, and they truly understand the
escape from sensual desire that has arisen. Their heart is not overcome
by ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and remorse ...
doubt ... They don't meditate dependent on earth, water, fire, and air.
They don't meditate dependent on the dimension of infinite space,
infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither perception nor
non-perception. They don't meditate dependent on this world or the other
world. They don't meditate dependent on what is seen, heard, thought,
known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. Yet they do meditate.

When a fine thoroughbred meditates like this, the gods together with
Indra, Brahmā, and the Progenitor worship them from afar:

> 'Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> We don't understand\
> the basis of your absorption.'"

When he said this, Venerable Sandha asked the Buddha, "But sir, how does
that fine thoroughbred meditate?"

"Sandha, for a fine thoroughbred person, the perception of earth has
vanished in relation to earth. The perception of water ... fire ... air
has vanished in relation to air. The perception of the dimension of
infinite space has vanished in relation to the dimension of infinite
space. The perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness ...
nothingness ... neither perception nor non-perception has vanished in
relation to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. The
perception of this world has vanished in relation to this world. The
perception of the other world has vanished in relation to the other
world. And the perception of what is seen, heard, thought, known,
attained, sought, or explored by the mind has vanished. That's how that
fine thoroughbred person doesn't meditate dependent on earth, water,
fire, and air. They don't meditate dependent on the dimension of
infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or neither
perception nor non-perception. They don't meditate dependent on this
world or the other world. They don't meditate dependent on what is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. Yet
they do meditate.

When a fine thoroughbred person meditates like this, the gods together
with Indra, Brahmā, and the Progenitor worship them from afar:

> 'Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> We don't understand\
> the basis of your absorption.'"

</article>
<article id="an11.10">

#### [AN 11.10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Moranivāpasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of
the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.
What three? The entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, and
wisdom. A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.

A mendicant who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What three? A
demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a
demonstration of instruction. A mendicant with these three qualities has
reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the
ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and
humans.

A mendicant who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What three?
Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom. A mendicant with these
three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary
from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are
best among gods and humans.

A mendicant who has two qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What two? Knowledge
and conduct. A mendicant with these two qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.
Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse:

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans.'

Now, that verse spoken by Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra is well spoken, not poorly
spoken. It's beneficial, not pointless, and I agree with it. I also say:

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans.'"

</article>

[]{#an11-anussativagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Recollection {#an11-anussativagga.xhtml_an11-anussativagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="an11.11">

#### [AN 11.11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahānāma (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamamahānāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good, Mahānāma! It's appropriate that gentlemen such as you come
to me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should
we practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The energetic
succeed, not the lazy. The mindful succeed, not the unmindful. Those
with immersion succeed, not those without immersion. The wise succeed,
not the witless.

When you're grounded on these five things, go on to develop six further
things.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who lives in
balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
developed the recollection of the Buddha.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called
a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced,
and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the teaching.

Furthermore, you should recollect the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' When a noble disciple recollects
the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This
is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are
unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've
entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own ethical conduct, which is
intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When a noble
disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a noble disciple who lives
in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
developed the recollection of their ethical conduct.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate. Among people with hearts full of the stain
of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of generosity.

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities: 'There are the gods of
the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama,
the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what
is imagined by others, the gods of Brahmā's host, and gods even higher
than these. When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn
there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is
not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is
unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple whose mind is
unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds
joy connected with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the
mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who
lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled
among people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the
teaching and developed the recollection of the deities."

</article>
<article id="an11.12">

#### [AN 11.12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Mahānāma (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyamahānāmasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Now at that time Mahānāma the
Sakyan had recently recovered from an illness. At that time several
mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha ...

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good, Mahānāma! It's appropriate that gentlemen such as you come
to me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should
we practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The energetic
succeed, not the lazy. The mindful succeed, not the unmindful. Those
with immersion succeed, not those without immersion. The wise succeed,
not the witless. When you're grounded on these five things, go on to
develop six further things.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. You should develop this recollection of the Buddha
while walking, standing, sitting, lying down, while working, and while
at home with your children.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... your
own ethical conduct ... your own generosity ... the deities ... When a
noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based
on the deities. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. You should develop this recollection of the deities
while walking, standing, sitting, lying down, while working, and while
at home with your children."

</article>
<article id="an11.13">

#### [AN 11.13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Nandiya ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nandiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Now at that time the Buddha wanted to commence the rains residence at
Sāvatthī.

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this, and thought, "Why don't I also
commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī. There I can focus on my work
and from time to time get to see the Buddha."

So the Buddha commenced the rains residence in Sāvatthī, and so did
Nandiya. There he focused on his work and from time to time got to see
the Buddha.

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good Nandiya! It's appropriate that gentlemen such as you come to
me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we
practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The ethical succeed,
not the unethical. The energetic succeed, not the lazy. The mindful
succeed, not the unmindful. Those with immersion succeed, not those
without immersion. The wise succeed, not the witless. When you're
grounded on these six things, go on to establish mindfulness on five
further things internally.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' In this way you
should establish mindfulness internally based on the Realized One.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' In this way you should establish mindfulness
internally based on the teaching.

Furthermore, you should recollect your good friends: 'I'm fortunate, so
very fortunate, to have good friends who advise and instruct me out of
kindness and sympathy.' In this way you should establish mindfulness
internally based on good friends.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate. Among people with hearts full of the stain
of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based
on generosity.

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities: 'There are deities who,
surpassing the company of deities that consume solid food, are reborn in
a certain host of mind-made deities. They don't see in themselves
anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.' An
irreversibly freed mendicant doesn't see in themselves anything more to
do, or anything that needs improvement. In the same way, Nandiya, there
are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume solid
food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don't see
in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.
In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the
deities.

A noble disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't cling to them. It's like when a pot full of water
is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn't go back in. Suppose
there was an uncontrolled fire. It advances burning up dry woodlands and
doesn't go back over what it has burned. In the same way, a noble
disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't cling to them."

</article>
<article id="an11.14">

#### [AN 11.14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Subhūti ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Subhūtisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then Venerable Subhūti together with the mendicant Saddha went up to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Subhūti, what is the name of this mendicant?"

"Sir, the name of this mendicant is Saddha. He is the son of the layman
Sudatta, and has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness."

"Well, I hope this mendicant Saddha exhibits the outcomes of faith."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
to speak on the outcomes of faith. Now I will find out whether or not
this mendicant Saddha exhibits the outcomes of faith."

"Well then, Subhūti, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Subhūti replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing
danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.
When a mendicant is ethical, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. When a
mendicant is learned, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
When a mendicant has good friends, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. When a mendicant is easy to admonish, this is an outcome
of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. When a mendicant is
deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties, this is an outcome of
faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. When a
mendicant loves the teachings, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. When a mendicant is energetic, this is an outcome of
faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant gets the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. When a mendicant gets the four
absorptions, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
When a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives, this is an outcome
of faith.

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, a
mendicant sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior
and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
spoke ill of the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they acted out of
that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never spoke ill of the noble ones; they had right view; and they acted
out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away
and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good
place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn
according to their deeds. When a mendicant has clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, this is an outcome of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. When a mendicant has
ended the defilements, this is an outcome of faith."

When he said this, Venerable Subhūti said to the Buddha:

"Sir, the outcomes of faith for a faithful person that the Buddha speaks
of are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them.

This mendicant is ethical ...

This mendicant is learned ...

This mendicant has good friends ...

This mendicant is easy to admonish ...

This mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties ...

This mendicant loves the teachings ...

This mendicant is energetic ...

This mendicant gets the four absorptions ...

This mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives ...

This mendicant has clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human
...

This mendicant has ended the defilements ...

The outcomes of faith for a faithful person that the Buddha speaks of
are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them."

"Good, good, Subhūti! So, Subhūti, you should live together with this
mendicant Saddha. And when you want to see the Realized One, you should
come together with him."

</article>
<article id="an11.15">

#### [AN 11.15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Love ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mettāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, you can expect eleven benefits when the heart's release by
love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a
basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented.

What eleven? You sleep at ease. You wake happily. You don't have bad
dreams. Humans love you. Non-humans love you. Deities protect you. You
can't be harmed by fire, poison, or blade. Your mind quickly enters
immersion. Your face is clear and bright. You don't feel lost when you
die. If you don't penetrate any higher, you'll be reborn in a Brahmā
realm. You can expect eleven benefits when the heart's release by love
has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a
basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented."

</article>
<article id="an11.16">

#### [AN 11.16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Wealthy Citizen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṭṭhakanāgarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī in the little
village of Beluva.

Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived
at Pāṭaliputta on some business. He went to the Chicken Monastery,
approached a certain mendicant, and said to him, "Sir, where is
Venerable Ānanda now staying? For I want to see him."

"Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in the little
village of Beluva."

Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went
to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by
the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute
mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive
at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke?"

"There is, householder."

"And what is that one thing?"

"Householder, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. Then they reflect:
'Even this first absorption is produced by choices and intentions.' They
understand: 'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is
impermanent and liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One---who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant's
mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. Then they reflect: 'Even this fourth
absorption is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But
whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable
to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and
resolute mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and
they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Then they reflect: 'Even this heart's
release by love is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand:
'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and
liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of
defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because
of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. This too is one
thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. Then they reflect: 'Even this heart's release by
equanimity is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But
whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable
to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. Then they reflect: 'Even this attainment of
the dimension of infinite space is produced by choices and intentions.'
They understand: 'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is
impermanent and liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. ... Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. ... Then
they reflect: 'Even this attainment of the dimension of nothingness is
produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But whatever is
produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to
cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and
resolute mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and
they reach the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for an entrance to a
hidden treasure. And all at once they'd come across eleven entrances! In
the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And
all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for cultivation.
Suppose a person had a house with eleven doors. If the house caught fire
they'd be able to flee to safety through any one of those doors. In the
same way, I'm able to flee to safety through any one of these eleven
doors to freedom from death. Sir, those of other religions will seek a
fee for the tutor. Why shouldn't I make an offering to Venerable
Ānanda?"

Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha from Vesālī and
Pāṭaliputta, served and satisfied them with his own hands with delicious
fresh and cooked foods. He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of
garments, with a set of three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling
worth five hundred built for Ānanda.

</article>
<article id="an11.17">

#### [AN 11.17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Cowherd ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Gopālasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can't maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd doesn't know form, is
unskilled in characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't
dress wounds, doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know
satisfaction, doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks
dry, and doesn't show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and
leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can't maintain
and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant doesn't know form, is unskilled in
characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't dress wounds,
doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know satisfaction,
doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and
doesn't show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long
gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant not know form? It's when a mendicant doesn't
truly understand that all form is the four principal states, or form
derived from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant doesn't
know form.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics? It's when a
mendicant doesn't understand that a fool is characterized by their
deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds. That's how
a mendicant isn't skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant not pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They
don't give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. They
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don't give
them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's
how a mendicant doesn't pick out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant not dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details. Since
the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don't practice
restraint, they don't protect the faculty of sight, and they don't
achieve its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When
they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with
their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they
know an idea with their mind, they get caught up in the features and
details. Since the faculty of the mind is left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become
overwhelming. They don't practice restraint, they don't protect the
faculty of the mind, and they don't achieve its restraint. That's how a
mendicant doesn't dress wounds.

And how does a mendicant not spread smoke? It's when a mendicant doesn't
teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.
That's how a mendicant doesn't spread smoke.

And how does a mendicant not know the ford? It's when a mendicant
doesn't from time to time go up to those mendicants who are very
learned---inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings,
the monastic law, and the outlines---and ask them questions: 'Why, sir,
does it say this? What does that mean?' Those venerables don't clarify
what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the
many doubtful matters. That's how a mendicant doesn't know the ford.

And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant,
when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds no inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds
no joy connected with the teaching. That's how a mendicant doesn't know
satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant not know the trail? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the noble eightfold path. That's how a
mendicant doesn't know the trail.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
That's how a mendicant is not skilled in pastures.

And how does a mendicant milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited by a
householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. But they don't know moderation in accepting.
That's how a mendicant milks dry.

And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of
long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? It's
when a mendicant doesn't consistently treat senior mendicants of long
standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with
kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in
private. That's how a mendicant doesn't show extra respect to senior
mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the
Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.
What eleven? It's when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in
characteristics, picks out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke,
knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in
pastures, doesn't milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are
fathers and leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can
maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks
out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows
satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn't milk dry,
and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone
forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant know form? It's when a mendicant truly
understands that all form is the four principal states, or form derived
from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant knows form.

And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics? It's when a mendicant
understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute
person is characterized by their deeds. That's how a mendicant is
skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
doesn't tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen,
but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and exterminates it.
They don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but
give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.
That's how a mendicant picks out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details.
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities
of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this
reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and
achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When
they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with
their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they
know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how a mendicant
dresses wounds.

And how does a mendicant spread smoke? It's when a mendicant teaches
others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it. That's how
a mendicant spreads smoke.

And how does a mendicant know the ford? It's when from time to time a
mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors
of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and
the outlines---and asks them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a mendicant knows the ford.

And how does a mendicant know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant, when
the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy
connected with the teaching. That's how a mendicant knows satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant know the trail? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the noble eightfold path. That's how a mendicant knows the
trail.

And how is a mendicant skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. That's how a
mendicant is skilled in pastures.

And how does a mendicant not milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited
by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And that mendicant knows moderation in accepting.
That's how a mendicant doesn't milk dry.

And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long
standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha? It's when
a mendicant consistently treats senior mendicants of long standing, long
gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of
body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. That's how a
mendicant shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing,
long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement,
or maturity in this teaching and training."

</article>
<article id="an11.18">

#### [AN 11.18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in
fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, mendicants."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

</article>
<article id="an11.19">

#### [AN 11.19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Could it be, mendicants, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in
water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the
dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't
perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other
world. And they wouldn't perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known,
attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still
perceive."

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

</article>
<article id="an11.20">

#### [AN 11.20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (3rd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tatiyasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

And then several mendicants went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they sat down to one side and said to him:

"Could it be, reverend, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, reverends."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

</article>
<article id="an11.21">

#### [AN 11.21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Immersion (4th) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Catutthasamādhisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Could it be, reverends, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in
water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the
dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't
perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other
world. And they wouldn't perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known,
attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still
perceive."

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May Venerable
Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, friend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

</article>

[]{#an11-samannavagga.xhtml}

### The Chapter on Similarity {#an11-samannavagga.xhtml_an11-samannavagga .section-title .heading}

::: {#an11-samannavagga.xhtml_an11.22-29 .section .range}
#### [AN 11.22--29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on the Eye ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.range-title .heading}

<article id="an11.22">

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can't maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd doesn't know form, is
unskilled in characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't
dress wounds, doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know
satisfaction, doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks
dry, and doesn't show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and
leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can't maintain
and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can't meditate
observing impermanence in the eye ...

</article>
<article id="an11.23">

suffering ...

</article>
<article id="an11.24">

not-self ...

</article>
<article id="an11.25">

ending ...

</article>
<article id="an11.26">

vanishing ...

</article>
<article id="an11.27">

fading away ...

</article>
<article id="an11.28">

cessation ...

</article>
<article id="an11.29">

letting go ..."

</article>
:::

<article id="an11.30-69">

#### [AN 11.30--69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on the Ear, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.70-117">

#### [AN 11.70--117]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
..."

</article>
<article id="an11.118-165">

#### [AN 11.118--165]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Eye Consciousness, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... eye consciousness ... ear consciousness ... nose consciousness
... tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness.
..."

</article>
<article id="an11.166-213">

#### [AN 11.166--213]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Eye Contact, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... eye contact ... ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact
... body contact ... mind contact. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.214-261">

#### [AN 11.214--261]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Feeling Born of Eye Contact, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ...
feeling born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ...
feeling born of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact ...

</article>
<article id="an11.262-309">

#### [AN 11.262--309]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Perception of Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... perception of sights ... perception of sounds ... perception of
smells ... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception
of ideas. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.310-357">

#### [AN 11.310--357]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Intention Regarding Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... intention regarding sights ... intention regarding sounds ...
intention regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention
regarding touches ... intention regarding ideas. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.358-405">

#### [AN 11.358--405]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Craving For Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... Craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for
smells ... craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for
ideas. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.406-453">

#### [AN 11.406--453]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Thoughts About Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... thoughts about sights ... thoughts about sounds ... thoughts
about smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ...
thoughts about ideas. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.454-501">

#### [AN 11.454--501]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Considerations Regarding Sights, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

... "... considerations regarding sights ... considerations regarding
sounds ... considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding
tastes ... considerations regarding touches ... meditate observing
impermanence in considerations about ideas ... meditate observing
suffering ... meditate observing not-self ... meditate observing ending
... meditate observing vanishing ... meditate observing fading away ...
meditate observing cessation ... meditate observing letting go. ..."

</article>
<article id="an11.502-981">

#### [AN 11.502--981]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on the Eye, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd knows form ...

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can meditate
observing impermanence in the eye ... meditate observing letting go.
..."

</article>

[]{#an11-ragapeyyala.xhtml}

### Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed {#an11-ragapeyyala.xhtml_an11-ragapeyyala .section-title .heading}

<article id="an11.982">

#### [AN 11.982]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourse on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For insight into greed, eleven things should be developed. What eleven?
The first, second, third, and fourth absorptions; the heart's releases
by love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity; the dimensions of
infinite space, infinite consciousness, and nothingness. For insight
into greed, these eleven things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an11.983-991">

#### [AN 11.983--991]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ... these eleven things should be developed."

</article>
<article id="an11.992-1151">

#### [AN 11.992--1151]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc. ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [\~ ]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... For the letting go of negligence, these eleven things
should be developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

The Book of the Elevens is finished.

The Numbered Discourses are completed.

</article>

[]{#colophon.xhtml}

<article epub:type="colophon" id="colophon">

# Colophon

## The Translator

[Bhikkhu Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} was born as Anthony Aidan Best
on [4/11/1966]{.dc:date} in Perth, Western Australia. He grew up in the
pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and Attadale alongside his sister Nicola,
who was the good child. His mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née
Pinder, said "he'll either be a priest or a poet", while his father,
Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to "never do anything for money". He
attended Aquinas College, a Catholic school, where he decided to become
an atheist. At the University of WA he studied philosophy, aiming to
learn what he wanted to do with his life. Finding that what he wanted to
do was play guitar, he dropped out. His main band was named Martha's
Vineyard, which achieved modest success in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in 2018, and the
early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were complete by 2021. All this work
is dedicated to the public domain and is entirely free of copyright
encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

## Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the Pali Tipiṭaka.
Translated from the Pali, with reference to several English
translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

## The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable English; consistent
terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of copyright. It was
made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was staying in Qimei,
Taiwan.

## About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

## About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

## About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

</article>

[]{#imprint.xhtml}

:::::: {#imprint.xhtml_imprint .section .imprint}
`<cite property="dc:title">`{=html}Numbered Discourses`</cite>`{=html}
is a translation of the [Aṅguttaranikāya]{property="dc:title"} by
[Bhikkhu Sujato]{property="dc:creator"}.

::: license
[Creative Commons Zero
([CC0]{.license-abbreviation})](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode){rel="license"
target="_blank"}

To the extent possible under law, [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} has waived all copyright and related or
neighboring rights to `<cite property="dct:title">`{=html}Numbered
Discourses`</cite>`{=html}.

This work is published from
[Australia]{about="https://suttacentral.net/licensing" content="AU"
datatype="dct:ISO3166" property="vcard:Country"}.

<aside class="license-statement">

This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.

</aside>
:::

::: {.text-metadata about="https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/master/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn"}
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Web publication date   2018
  This edition           2024-08-19 01:54:37
  Publication type       epub
  Edition                ed2
  Number of volumes      1
  Publication ISBN       978-1-76132-027-9
  Publication URL        <https://suttacentral.net/editions/an/en/sujato>
  Source URL             <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/an>
  Publication number     scpub5
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: publisher
Published by [SuttaCentral]{.publisher property="dc:publisher"}

<address>
SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia\
</address>
:::
::::::
