# Pages

> The Realized One, compassionate for all living creatures,\
> unstintingly offers teaching.\
> Sentient beings revere him,\
> first among gods and humans.

[The Holy Offering of the Teaching]{.epigraph-translated-title}
([Brāhmaṇadhammayāgasutta]{.epigraph-root-title})\
[Itivuttaka 100]{.epigraph-reference}

# The SuttaCentral Editions Series

Since 2005 SuttaCentral has provided access to the texts, translations,
and parallels of early Buddhist texts. In 2018 we started creating and
publishing our translations of these seminal spiritual classics. The
"Editions" series now makes selected translations available as books in
various forms, including print, PDF, and EPUB.

Editions are selected from our most complete, well-crafted, and reliable
translations. They aim to bring these texts to a wider audience in forms
that reward mindful reading. Care is taken with every detail of the
production, and we aim to meet or exceed professional best standards in
every way. These are the core scriptures underlying the entire Buddhist
tradition, and we believe that they deserve to be preserved and made
available in the highest quality without compromise.

SuttaCentral is a charitable organization. Our work is accomplished by
volunteers and through the generosity of our donors. Everything we
create is offered to all of humanity free of any copyright or licensing
restrictions.

# Preface to the Itivuttaka

For the slightest of the early Buddhist books, I feel I should write a
slight preface. There is beauty in simplicity and strength in humility.
Spiritual teachings need not always tell us something new, nor need they
dazzle us with complicated philosophy or intricate arguments. Sometimes
the most powerful lesson is that which you have always known.

It is a discomforting thought, but when I think of those who most
effortlessly embody the Buddha's teachings, it is rarely those who have
mastered the scriptures or who debate the meaning of abstruse points. It
is in the simple offering, the quiet devotion, the humble wisdom, the
unnoticed kindness that I see the flowering of grace.

To be all that we can be is to be less than we have become. If all that
the suttas did was to fill us with information, they would be as useful
as an ancient Wikipedia (which would be no bad thing). The real wisdom
of the suttas, I have come to learn, lies in their delicate balance:
saying what need be said and not saying what need not be said.

A full meal is best enjoyed on an empty stomach. And the suttas will
fill our minds and hearts, but only if we respect their empty spaces.

</article>

[]{#introduction.xhtml}

<article class="introduction" id="introduction">

# So It Was Said: summary sayings

Bhikkhu Sujato, 2022

<nav class="contents">

1.  [The Chinese Collection of Itivuttakas](#introduction.xhtml_item1)
2.  [The Formation of the Itivuttaka](#introduction.xhtml_item2)
3.  [The Purpose of the Itivuttaka](#introduction.xhtml_item3)
4.  [Relation Between Prose and Verse](#introduction.xhtml_item4)
5.  [Similes](#introduction.xhtml_item5)
6.  [A Few Remarks on the Discourses](#introduction.xhtml_item6)
7.  [A Brief Textual History](#introduction.xhtml_item7)

</nav>

The Itivuttaka or "So it Was Said" is the fourth book of the Pali
Khuddhaka Nikāya, the "Minor Collection". It is a short book, with 112
discourses in mixed prose and verse. The teachings in the Itivuttaka are
by and large straightforward, as is the style of both prose and verse.

The text is arranged in the Aṅguttara style of incremental numbering,
which here goes from the Ones through Fours. Within each of these major
sections, the texts are rather arbitrarily divided into chapters
(*vagga*) of ten. The exceptions are the concluding chapters of the
Ones, Twos, and Fours, which contain 7, 12, and 13 discourses
respectively.

## The Chinese Collection of Itivuttakas {#introduction.xhtml_item1}

As with most of the early texts in the Pali Canon, there exists a
corresponding Chinese version: [本事經]{lang="lzh"} (Taishō vol. 17,
sutra 765), which was translated by Xuanzang in CE 650. This was studied
by K. Watanabe in his `<cite>`{=html}A Chinese Collection of
Itivuttakas`</cite>`{=html} (Journal of the Pali Text Society V,
1906--7, pp. 44--49).

The Chinese text contains framing statements that are similar to the
Pali, except the final statement is omitted. This is, I think, a
significant detail, to which I will return below.

While the first two sections are similar to the Pali, three-fifths of
the third and all of the fourth sections are missing. That this is the
result of an incomplete text, rather than a shorter recension, is
supported by two details. The text lacks a concluding *uddāna*, the
summary verse or "resumé" that is normally found at the end of every
section. And the content of the Suttas, while remaining within the scope
of the early Buddhist teachings, is somewhat developed compared to the
Pali. It seems, then, that the Chinese text represents an incomplete
text of a somewhat later version of an Itivuttaka.

It is not clear why a scholar as able as Xuanzang would leave the work
incomplete. Perhaps he had only a partial manuscript to work with, or
perhaps it was simply that other demands took his time. In the
introduction to his translation of the Itivuttaka, Ven. Ṭhānissaro
remarks that Xuanzang's translation "dates from the last months of his
life". This is mistaken and apparently caused by a misreading of
Watanabe's article. Xuanzang did not die until fourteen years later, in
664.

## The Formation of the Itivuttaka {#introduction.xhtml_item2}

Each Sutta is introduced with a distinct phrase saying the text was
"said" (*vutta*) by the Buddha, and it appears that this tag is what
gives the collection its name. The tag is more than just an
introduction; it is a full template that frames each discourse.

- Start the prose --- *This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One:
  that is what I heard.*
- End the prose --- *The Buddha spoke this matter.*
- Start the verse --- *On this it is said:*
- End the verse --- *This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed
  One: that is what I heard.*

This framework, more formalized and consistent than the standard forms,
is adhered to rigorously throughout without variation.

Note that the tag lines assume that the verse comments on the prose
(*tattha*). Note too that here, as in the Udāna, *attha* has the sense
"matter, substance, content" rather than "meaning".

The opening compound, *vuttañhetaṁ* contains the particle *hi*, which
most translators ignore, but which Masefield perhaps over-renders as
"unquestionably". This exact idiom is not used elsewhere in the early
texts, but it is quite common in the Niddesa, where it seems to act as a
logical connection. A doctrine is stated, and it is supported with
additional quotations. Perhaps then we should translate, "For this was
said by the Buddha ...".

Unusually, there is no mention of the setting or other background
details. Additionally, there are few personal names in the text. Apart
from the Buddha, who is referred to by many epithets, only the Buddha's
antagonists Devadatta ([Iti
89](https://suttacentral.net/iti89/en/sujato)) and Māra ([Iti
58](https://suttacentral.net/iti58/en/sujato), [Iti
68](https://suttacentral.net/iti68/en/sujato), [Iti
82](https://suttacentral.net/iti82/en/sujato), [Iti
83](https://suttacentral.net/iti83/en/sujato), [Iti
93](https://suttacentral.net/iti93/en/sujato)) are mentioned by name. As
for places, only the Vulture's Peak in Rāgaha is mentioned ([Iti
24](https://suttacentral.net/iti24/en/sujato)). All this adds up to an
oddly abstracted and spare text, almost Abhidhammic in style. It
suggests that the collection was compiled from reports of what the
Buddha said rather than from first-hand recollections.

This is, in fact, the position of the commentary, which explains that
the Itivuttaka, alone among the texts of the Pali canon, was not
compiled primarily by the monks, but by the laywoman Khujjuttarā. In the
Aṅguttara Nikāya, she was extolled by the Buddha as the foremost in
learning among the laywomen and is frequently held up as an exemplary
laywoman. While the Suttas do not say how she earned that title, the
commentary tells of how, as handmaid to Queen Sāmāvatī of Kosambi, she
became the respected teacher of Dhamma for the ladies of the court. This
story is only part of a much longer and very dramatic series of events
known as the Kosambi Cycle.

It seems that the Queen entrusted her with procuring flowers for the
court, but she would save some of the money each day. One day, she
overheard the Buddha teaching the Dhamma to the gardener Sumana and
right away entered the stream. In celebration, she spent her saved money
on flowers, prompting the queen to ask where they all came from. And
when Khujjuttarā told her, the queen showered her with honors, bathed
her in perfumed water, and became her student. Khujjuttarā continued to
listen and memorize the Dhamma from the Buddha and would convey it to
all the court ladies, who became stream-enterers in turn. These
teachings were compiled into the Itivuttaka, which is why they do not
have the usual prose opening formula.

It is difficult to reconcile this story with the Itivuttaka as it
stands. The texts are clearly organized in a pattern of numbers from one
to four, and it seems improbable that Khujjuttarā just happened to hear
texts that would be amenable to such an arrangement. It could be that
she did hear many more teachings, but selected certain texts and
arranged them for the ladies of the court. However, there is no special
emphasis on teachings suitable for court ladies, and several quite
difficult texts that would be hard to make sense of without a broader
context.

On the other hand, there seems no reason why the monks would invent such
a story, which sidelines their role in the creation of this text, and
ascribes it instead to the elevated slave of a doomed dynasty. As so
often in such matters, we are left without definite conclusions. The
absence of certainty does not, however, imply the presence of ignorance.
In such matters, it is usually the case that there is something to the
stories; they are rarely fabricated out of thin air. We should not
reject knowledge simply because it is unconfirmed or hard to understand.
The truth is surely more complicated than we know. Yet if we were to
abandon our few clues because they are not as certain as we would like,
we would be like someone who, lost in the darkness with only a candle to
light the way, blows out the candle because it is not a torch.

A text called Itivuttaka is mentioned in the list of the nine *aṅgas*
(sections) of the Dhamma that is found throughout the early texts. And
as with so many of the *aṅgas*, it is not easy to determine the extent
to which the Itivuttaka as it exists today is the same text referred to
as an *aṅga*.

Normally the *aṅgas* define a genre of text with an identifiable style.
If, however, we accept the Theravadin account, the Itivuttaka is unusual
in that there is no intrinsic relationship between the name of the
*aṅga* and the style of text. The discourses are, leaving the unique
framing aside, essentially no different from those found in the
Aṅguttara. Perhaps, like most *aṅgas*, *itivuttaka* originally referred
to a distinct genre of early Buddhist literature.

The name itself is perhaps misleadingly malleable. By that I mean that
it compounds two very common words (*iti* "thus" and *vutta* "spoke")
and hence may be applied very generally. However, in idiomatic usage,
the terms have a more specific and stronger sense: something that is
quoted or passed down from the past. The name is reminiscent of the
class of Vedic literature called *itihāsa*, "Thus It Was", i.e. "stories
of the past, legendary histories", which is sometimes equated with the
Mahābhārata and the Ramāyana. Similarly, *itikirā* "So It Seems", though
sometimes translated as "hearsay", is grouped with words referring to
the transmission of texts, and must mean something like "testament". We
also find *itihītiha* "So and So It Was" used of knowledge that has been
passed down from the past.

By analogy, *itivuttaka* would mean "sayings of the past", which could
refer to the legendary histories that are found in the Nikāyas, such as
the Aggaññasutta ([DN 27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato)) and
the Cakkavattisīhanādasutta ([DN
26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato)), as well as legendary lore
such as the 32 marks of the great man, or the occasional sayings
reported to have been passed down from teachers of old (eg. [MN
75:19.11](https://suttacentral.net/mn75/en/sujato#19.11)). This theory
finds support from the great Mahāyāna commentator Asaṅga, who in his
Abhidharmasamuccaya says *itivuttaka* "narrates the former existences of
the noble disciples", while in the Śrāvakabhūmi of the
Yogacārabhūmiśāstra, he says it refers to "whatever is connected with
previous practice".

Still further support may be adduced in that part of the framing tags of
the Itivuttaka---specifically, those that connect the prose and
verse---are found in one other text of the Pali canon in nearly
identical form (lacking only a connecting *iti*: *tatthetaṁ vuccati*
rather than *tatthetaṁ iti vuccati*). This is in [DN
30](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato) Mahāpurisalakkhaṇasutta, an
extended elaboration of the so-called "marks of the great man", which
are said in the Suttas to be traditional lore handed down among the
brahmins. The verses especially are among the latest additions to the
four Nikāyas, and in this case, it is clear that the tagline serves to
add verses to a pre-existing prose text. The commentary says that some
"elders of old" explain *tatthetaṁ vuccati* as indicating that the
verses were added by Ānanda.

If this reasoning is cogent, then it seems that *itivuttaka* originally
referred to the various legendary accounts that are currently scattered
in the four Nikāyas. At some point---the First Council, perhaps---the
material organized in the nine *aṅgas* was rearranged for the
convenience of memorization into the Nikāyas. With the legendary texts
absorbed in the Nikāyas, the name *itivuttaka* was floating unused and
was adopted to frame this small selection of Aṅguttara style texts.

If this is true it may be easily reconciled with the traditional
account. There is no reason why, if the collection as we have it is due
to Khujjuttarā, it should not have been titled Itivuttaka at a later
date. All this is, of course, speculative.

## The Purpose of the Itivuttaka {#introduction.xhtml_item3}

Given its minor position within the Pali Canon, it is probably safe to
assume that most modern readers will pick up the Itivuttaka when already
familiar with the Suttas from the Nikāyas. It may be that this is the
wrong approach.

The text begins with a series of teachings on the "one thing" that must
be given up. To read a series of multiple "one things" is a bit odd. Are
they all "one thing"? What is the relation between them? Does any one of
these imply all the rest? The text begins by speaking of realizing
"non-return", assuming the audience already knows what this is and wants
to attain it.

Take the first discourse: the one thing to be given up is greed. As a
reader, this discourse can be skimmed in a couple of minutes, and it
provides no new information or perspective. But perhaps that is not its
purpose. Perhaps the text was meant to be approached as a meditation
structured for those who are familiar with the basics and are
undertaking the process of internalizing the theory.

One could learn just this one discourse and take it as a theme for
meditation. Focus only on greed, and how it drags the mind to unworthy
places. The *idea* is simple, but to truly digest it can be long and
complex work. By giving only the simplest of outlines, the text leaves
the details to the individual, who is left to explore their relation to
greed.

Such a process might take days, weeks, or months. But conservatively,
one might take such a short discourse as the theme of contemplation for
a day. The next day it is not greed, but hate. The details, differences,
and relations between greed and hate are not spelled out; they are
realized by the meditator, informed by their prior study and experience.

And so on through the different qualities. Then the round repeats with a
slight variation. Then new topics are introduced, each one a
self-contained reflection.

I can't prove that this is why the Itivuttaka is the way it is, but I do
think this offers a promising way of approaching the text.

## Relation Between Prose and Verse {#introduction.xhtml_item4}

Unlike the Udāna, where the verse is the culminating purpose of the
narrative, here the verses serve to repeat and amplify the prose
teachings, again in a style similar to certain portions of the
Aṅguttara. In line with the systematic tendency of the Itivuttaka, this
pattern occurs in all Suttas.

The framing text asserts that both prose and verse portions were spoken
by the Buddha. However, it is careful to qualify this by saying "so I
have heard", indicating that the speaker was not present when the
teachings were given, but rather is passing down an oral tradition. It
is quite possible that this is correct, and that both prose and verse
were spoken in this form by the Buddha. However, there are several
indications that this is not always the case.

It is quite common for Buddhist texts to have verse and prose portions
that are loosely coupled. Sometimes the same verse has a different prose
background. Sometimes the connection between the two seems distant or
arbitrary. Sometimes the texts attribute the different portions to
different authors. So it would be no great surprise for the Itivuttaka
to follow a similar pattern.

A fruitful approach is to look at the implicit speaker in the text,
rather than the speaker assigned by the framework. Now, the framing
portions must have been added by redactors at some point, possibly the
First Council. They are in the third person, reporting what the Buddha
said.

In the prose teaching portions, by contrast, the Buddha refers to
himself in the first person (eg. [Iti
14](https://suttacentral.net/iti14/en/sujato) *ahaṁ*; [Iti
103](https://suttacentral.net/iti103/en/sujato) *na me te*).
Appropriately, he addresses the mendicants in the second person (eg.
[Iti 22](https://suttacentral.net/iti22/en/sujato) *mā, bhikkhave,
puññānaṁ bhāyittha*; [Iti 38](https://suttacentral.net/iti38/en/sujato)
*tumhepi abyāpajjhārāmā viharatha*; [Iti
111](https://suttacentral.net/iti111/en/sujato) *sampannasīlā,
bhikkhave, viharatha*). I'm setting aside here the vocative form of
direct address found in every Sutta (*bhikkhave*), as this could be
regarded as a mere convention.

In the verses, however, we typically find the third person used for both
the Buddha and the mendicants, in a manner that is more similar to the
framing portions.

For example, in [Iti 26](https://suttacentral.net/iti26/en/sujato) the
prose is in the first person "as I understand" *yathāhaṁ jānāmi*, while
the verse reports the words of the Buddha, "as taught by the great
hermit" (*yathāvuttaṁ mahesinā*). Not only is this in the third person,
but the passive instrumental construction is identical to that used in
the frame (*vutto bhagavatā*). The Buddha is also referred to in the
third person in a similar way in [Iti
36](https://suttacentral.net/iti36/en/sujato) (*adesayi so bhagavā*,
*yathā buddhena desitaṁ*).

In [Iti 85](https://suttacentral.net/iti85/en/sujato) the mendicants are
addressed in the second person in the prose (*viharatha*), but the third
person is used in the verse (*vimuccati*).

In [Iti 70](https://suttacentral.net/iti70/en/sujato), [Iti
71](https://suttacentral.net/iti71/en/sujato), and [Iti
81](https://suttacentral.net/iti81/en/sujato) the Buddha speaks of how
good and bad kamma results in good or bad rebirths, insisting that this
is something that he has seen for himself (*diṭṭhā mayā*), and has not
learned from any other ascetic or brahmin. The verses again are in the
third person.

[Iti 92](https://suttacentral.net/iti92/en/sujato) has one of the
Itivuttaka's rare moments of intimacy. The Buddha speaks of a
poorly-behaved mendicant who might follow him around holding the corner
of his robe, yet they remain "far from me, and I from them" (*ārakāva
mayhaṁ, ahañca tassa*). This is unlike one who has well-practiced the
Dhamma, to whom the Buddha is always close. The verses once more avoid
the personal touch here. The same pattern holds for [Iti
100](https://suttacentral.net/iti100/en/sujato), where the Buddha says
to his students that "you are my children" (*me tumhe puttā*); and in
[Iti 107](https://suttacentral.net/iti107/en/sujato) where the
mendicants are enjoined to be grateful for the things that the lay folk
offer "to you", while in both cases the verses shift to the more distant
third person.

Rarely in the analysis of ancient texts do we find that a pattern admits
of no exceptions. It is true, admittedly, that the prose text sometimes
has the Buddha referring to himself in the third person as the "Realized
One" (eg. [Iti 38](https://suttacentral.net/iti38/en/sujato), [Iti
39](https://suttacentral.net/iti39/en/sujato), [Iti
84](https://suttacentral.net/iti84/en/sujato)). But this is a common
feature of prose Suttas. The Buddha speaks in this way when evoking the
profound nature of his state of transcendent realization ([Iti
112](https://suttacentral.net/iti112/en/sujato)).

In [Iti 47](https://suttacentral.net/iti47/en/sujato) the verses are in
a direct second person. This, however, turns out to be the exception
that proves the rule, for the subject here is wakefulness. The text is
designed to jolt awake the sleepy, so the direct address of the second
person is called for. Amid the almost brutalist plainness of the
Itivuttaka, this qualifies as a flourish of literary style.

A further exception is in [Iti
99](https://suttacentral.net/iti99/en/sujato), where both the prose and
verse employ the first person. The verses are not unique to this Sutta,
however, for they are found in a similar context in [AN
3.58](https://suttacentral.net/an3.58/en/sujato) and [AN
3.59](https://suttacentral.net/an3.59/en/sujato). There, the Buddha is
responding to a brahmin who challenges him on the true meaning of a
"brahmin who is master of the three knowledges". The brahmin defines
this in terms of knowing the Vedic literary tradition, while the Buddha
redefines it, as always, in terms of the gradual training and the
realization of the three higher knowledges. The text of the Itivuttaka
reads like the Aṅguttara texts with the narrative removed and has
probably been adapted from there. This is an interesting case because it
agrees very nicely with the traditional origin story of the Itivuttaka.
A text with a narrative context has been repeated in a slightly adapted
and stripped-down form, taking a step towards an almost Abhidhammic
plainness.

Finally, in two further Suttas we find the first person *brūmi* "I say"
used in verse ([Iti
38:7.5](https://suttacentral.net/iti38/en/sujato#7.5), [Iti
46:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/iti46/en/sujato#3.4)). These lines are
unique to the Itivuttaka, so they constitute a genuine exception to the
rule.

In sum, there is a strong tendency for the prose sections to be
presented as the Buddha speaking directly to the monks, while the verses
read as a third-hand rephrasing of the same teachings, sometimes
summarizing or expanding. The few occasions where this pattern does not
hold are mostly explained by the specific context. This pattern suggests
that, on the whole, the prose portions are relatively direct reports of
the Buddha's words, while the verses were added by redactors.

I noted above that the Chinese version, though otherwise appearing
somewhat more developed than the Pali, lacks the final tag phrase of the
frame (*ayampi attho vutto bhagavatā*). It is in this line that the Pali
text asserts that the verses were spoken by the Buddha. The tag phrase
that starts the verses says simply "on this it is said" (*tatthetaṁ iti
vuccati*), which might easily refer to an addition made by redactors.
Recall that a nearly-identical tag is used in [DN
30](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato) where it indicates a later
addition.

This provides, I think, concrete support for the conclusion that the
verses are for the most part a later addition to the prose. Originally
they were simply presented as such, but at some point, the redactors
claimed that, like the prose, the verses were "also" (*pi*) spoken by
the Buddha. As we have seen, they were not entirely wrong, for some of
the verses do present as the direct words of the Buddha. And in many
other cases, there is no real evidence either way.

A case like this is not so much an attempt to misrepresent the material
as it is an outcome of a process of systematization. Material from
diverse sources is flattened and simplified, and certain nuances get
lost along the way. The Theravada tradition is usually very scrupulous
about such details, and less inclined to adapt older texts to later
needs. Yet this case proves the exception, as the northern---possibly
Sarvāstivādin---text retains a clue to an earlier form.

## Similes {#introduction.xhtml_item5}

Moore, in the introduction to his 1908 translation, counts a round fifty
similes in the Itivuttaka, and the following is based on his analysis.
Nature provides most of the similes, starting with water in its many
forms.

Water is a decidedly ambiguous element in the Itivuttaka. It often
figures in powerfully negative ways. The realm of desire and suffering
is called a flood (*ogha*, [Iti
107](https://suttacentral.net/iti107/en/sujato)), an ocean (*samudda*,
[Iti 69](https://suttacentral.net/iti69/en/sujato)), a river (*nadī*) or
a stream, (*sota*, [Iti
109](https://suttacentral.net/iti109/en/sujato)), or even a treacherous
whirlpool (*āvaṭṭa*, [Iti
109:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti109/en/sujato#7.1)). A perfected
one crosses (*tarati*, occurring about a dozen times) beyond all these,
going to the far side (*pāra*, [Iti
69:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/iti69/en/sujato#2.4)).

On the other hand, the bursting of a rain cloud is like one whose
generosity covers all quarters ([Iti
75](https://suttacentral.net/iti75/en/sujato)), while one who
understands the Dhamma is like a still lake unruffled by the winds ([Iti
92](https://suttacentral.net/iti92/en/sujato)).

Metaphors based upon light are almost as numerous as the aqueous
metaphors, but unlike the water's ambiguity, they are invariably
positive, contrasting with the darkness of ignorance. The awakened
mendicants are the "torch-bearers" for those still in darkness ([Iti
104:2.9](https://suttacentral.net/iti104/en/sujato#2.9)). Of the
heavenly bodies, we find the sun ([Iti
59:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/iti59/en/sujato#3.4), [Iti
88:11.4](https://suttacentral.net/iti88/en/sujato#11.4)), the moon ([Iti
27:9.3](https://suttacentral.net/iti27/en/sujato#9.3), [Iti
74:7.5](https://suttacentral.net/iti74/en/sujato#7.5)), and the
morning-star, (*osadhitaraka*, [Iti
27:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti27/en/sujato#5.1)) as images of
wisdom and freedom.

Fire, like water, is often negative. The impressive and relatively
modern technology of smelting iron, based on the capacity to focus and
amplify heat beyond anything experienced in nature, provides a suitable
metaphor for the fate awaiting evildoers in hell ([Iti
48:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti48/en/sujato#5.1), [Iti
91:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti91/en/sujato#5.1)).

The highest goal of Nibbāna, of course, is the quenching or
extinguishment of a flame, the fundamental image of all Buddhism. One
who has attained such is far from those who are still burning ([Iti
92:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/iti92/en/sujato#4.4)).

Ambiguously, Devadatta before his fall had glory that shone forth like
the crest of a flame ([Iti
89:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/iti89/en/sujato#4.3))).

Despite its rather austere style, at times the Itivuttaka builds images
in a way that accumulates beauty. A gentle series of similes describes
one who can let go of greed, like the water that rolls off a lotus leaf;
hate, like a palm-leaf falling from its stem; and delusion, like the
rising sun banishing the dark ([Iti
88](https://suttacentral.net/iti88/en/sujato)).

Few animals are mentioned in the Itivuttaka, but of those that are we
find a man who wraps stinky fish (*maccha*, [Iti
76:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti76/en/sujato#7.1)); and the Buddha
compared to a lion (*sīha*, [Iti
112:10.2](https://suttacentral.net/iti112/en/sujato#10.2)).

One who enters the water is at risk of being devoured by the saltwater
crocodile (*gaha*, [Iti
69:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/iti69/en/sujato#2.2), [Iti
109:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/iti109/en/sujato#2.3)). Science tells
us that seven species of crocodile flourished in ancient India, sadly
reduced to three in the present day. Pali offers us at least five words
for these: *suṁsumārā*, *susukā*, *nakka*, *gaha* (*gāha*, *gahaka*),
and *kumbhīlā*. It is not clear which words apply to which species, or
even if they correlate to different species at all. Only the *gaha*
appears in the Itivuttaka, and it notably is a denizen of both oceans
and large lakes, so I think it must be a saltwater crocodile. Since the
*kumbhīlā* and *susukā* do not appear to inhabit the ocean, I call them
"marsh crocodiles" and "gharials" respectively, while *suṁsumārā* is
generically a "crocodile".

There is, I believe, an implicit metaphor in the term *siṅgī*, "fraud",
that is applied to a bad monk in [Iti
108](https://suttacentral.net/iti108/en/sujato). This is a word for
either "horn" or "gold". I believe the latter is meant here, for there
are hints that the kind of gold meant is adulterated, perhaps a form of
rose gold admixed with copper to form jewelry. The robes accepted by the
Buddha shortly before his Parinibbāna are this color, where they are
meant to contrast palely with the true gold of the Buddha's skin. I
think *siṅgī* became an idiomatic term for "false gold" and hence a bad
monk.

A few miscellaneous similes are worthy of note. The poisoned arrow that
contaminates its quiver ([Iti
76](https://suttacentral.net/iti76/en/sujato)) is like a bad person who
infects those around them. The striking image occurs of the conduit to
rebirth (*netti*, [Iti
43:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti43/en/sujato#4.1)), psychologically
explained as craving, but metaphorically evocative of a line or a link
that leads from one life to the next. Finally, the piling up of a
person's bones in their countless rebirths would reach higher than the
great mountain of Vulture Peak ([Iti
24](https://suttacentral.net/iti24/en/sujato)).

## A Few Remarks on the Discourses {#introduction.xhtml_item6}

### The Ones

The first chapter begins with a series of teachings on the "one thing".
This follows the pattern of the Aṅguttara, although the specifics are
different. Rather than opening with the overcoming of sensual desire,
here we begin with what must be given up to guarantee non-return. This
is the third of the four stages of awakening commonly taught in the
Buddhist texts:

- Stream-entry (*sotāpatti*)
- Once-return (*sakadāgāmitā*)
- Non-return (*anāgāmitā*)
- Perfection (*arahattā*)

The qualities spoken of, however, don't always sit easily with this
ideal. A non-returner has given up greed ([Iti
1](https://suttacentral.net/iti1/en/sujato)) and hate ([Iti
2](https://suttacentral.net/iti2/en/sujato)), but they have not given up
delusion ([Iti 3](https://suttacentral.net/iti3/en/sujato)) or conceit
([Iti 6](https://suttacentral.net/iti6/en/sujato)). Perhaps the text has
been overly systematized since these details are repeated in the next
section where they fit better. But this is the kind of detail that the
Pali texts are normally very careful with.

The next series graduates from non-return to speak of ending suffering
through complete understanding, which implies arahantship. This pattern
crosses over the boundary of the second chapter, which suggests that the
texts were grouped before being somewhat arbitrarily organized in groups
of ten. Likewise, the pair on the "corrupted mind" ([Iti
20](https://suttacentral.net/iti20/en/sujato)) and "pure mind" ([Iti
21](https://suttacentral.net/iti21/en/sujato)) also cross the chapter
boundary. Again, we find a similar phenomenon in the Aṅguttara, where
for example the discourses on the radiant or corrupted mind
([1.49](https://suttacentral.net/1.49/en/sujato)--52) cross the boundary
of the fifth and sixth chapters.

These details are not very important in themselves, but they do indicate
the struggles of the redactors to formalize the organization of texts.
If we are alert to these issues, we guard against reading undue
significance into mere editorial choices.

The benefits of the meditation on love are extolled in ([Iti
22](https://suttacentral.net/iti22/en/sujato)), which details some of
the Buddha's past life practices, and ([Iti
27](https://suttacentral.net/iti27/en/sujato)), which is adorned by a
series of glorious metaphors. This relatively extended and exalted text
forms a suitable conclusion to the first part of the book. This pattern
repeats throughout the Itivuttaka, as the final discourse of each of the
numbers deals with deep matters in a solemn tone.

### The Twos

Continuing a similar approach, the second chapter speaks of sets of "two
things" that lead to happiness or suffering, or else practices that lead
to one of two good results.

In a break from the practical ethics of most of the Itivuttaka, [Iti
43](https://suttacentral.net/iti43/en/sujato) speaks of Nibbāna as the
"unborn", in a passage shared with [Ud
8.3](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.3/en/sujato). Here an extra set of
verses is added, adding to the impression that the Itivuttaka is
compiled from earlier texts, sometimes with additions.

In [Iti 44](https://suttacentral.net/iti44/en/sujato) we find one of the
few distinct doctrinal contributions of the Itivuttaka. It introduces
the distinction between "the element of extinguishment with something
left over" (*saupādisesā ca nibbānadhātu*) and "the element of
extinguishment with nothing left over" (*anupādisesā ca nibbānadhātu*).
The first refers to an arahant who has abandoned all defilements, yet
who continues to live and experience pleasure and pain. The second
refers to an arahant for whom "everything that's felt, being no longer
relished, will become cool right here". This presumably refers to the
time of death, an inference that is confirmed in the verses. The idea of
the "element of extinguishment with nothing left over" is found
elsewhere in the Suttas in the same sense, but here it is more clearly
defined. And while the contrast with what "has something left over" is
found elsewhere in the Suttas, nowhere is this said to be an "element of
extinguishment". A fine distinction to be sure, but it indicates that
the Itivuttaka is not solely a remix of teachings from elsewhere in the
canon. This distinction went on to become a fundamental aspect of the
Theravadin teachings on Nibbāna.

### The Threes

Rather than contrasting pairs, the Threes begins with the enumeration of
various sets of three principles, such as greed, hate, and delusion, or
the three feelings.

While most of the teachings are familiar from elsewhere in the Suttas,
we find a few unique presentations. For example, in [Iti
74](https://suttacentral.net/iti74/en/sujato) a child is said to better,
equal, or fail their birth, while the famous simile of the generous
giver who is like a rainstorm over all quarters is found in [Iti
75](https://suttacentral.net/iti75/en/sujato). One who wisely wishes for
even the worldly aims of wealth, praise, and heaven should guard their
morality [Iti 76](https://suttacentral.net/iti76/en/sujato).

At [Iti 77](https://suttacentral.net/iti77/en/sujato) we find a rather
blunt assessment of the fragility of the body, consciousness, and all
attachments. And while it is commonly said that a heavenly rebirth is a
reward for good deeds, the aspiration to heaven is put to question by
the fact that even the gods celebrate a mendicant going forth ([Iti
82](https://suttacentral.net/iti82/en/sujato)), and the end of their
all-too-temporary lives is foreshadowed by five signs ([Iti
83](https://suttacentral.net/iti83/en/sujato)).

Among the straightforward, didactic texts of the Itivuttaka, we find an
occasional passage of a more subtle philosophical nature. Such is [Iti
63](https://suttacentral.net/iti63/en/sujato) on the three "periods" of
the past, future, and present. According to Buddhist philosophy, the use
of language embeds notions of time in the very pathways of thought. Thus
those who are still trapped in the "communicable" (*akkheyya*) do not
find the peace that is beyond time and reckoning (*saṅkhyaṁ nopeti*).

### The Fours

The discourses of the Fours are often held to be later than the other
numbers; I don't know that I am completely persuaded by this, but
certainly, the section is notable for its brevity. While the exact forms
of the discourses are sometimes unique to the Itivuttaka, there is
nothing in the teachings that would not be familiar to a student of the
four Nikāyas.

## A Brief Textual History {#introduction.xhtml_item7}

A Latin-script edition of the Itivuttaka was published in 1889 by the
Pali Text Society. It was edited by the handsomely-bearded Ernst
Windisch, who was a professor of Sanskrit and comparative linguistics at
the University of Leipzig. He made use of three manuscripts in Sinhalese
script and four in Burmese, as well as a copy of the commentary. He
notes that the Sinhalese manuscripts appear to have been influenced by
Burmese script, an indication that they were copied from Burmese
sources. His primary source was a Burmese manuscript held in the India
Office Library, which he describes as "beautifully written", and which
almost always held the more correct reading. Windisch gave each Sutta a
number in simple sequence, a numbering system that is still used by
SuttaCentral. His discussion of the manuscripts is exemplary and well
worth a read to see the process by which modern editions are created.
The edition is extensively footnoted, and is praised by Ireland and by
Moore, who calls it "admirable". Masefield, however, draws attention to
the "poor quality of many readings" in this edition, for which he
supplies emendations.

The first English translation was published by Columbia University Press
in 1908 by Justin Hartley Moore under the title `<cite>`{=html}Sayings
of Buddha`</cite>`{=html}. Moore undertook the translation for his Ph.D.
program at Columbia University, a task he described as "a dive into
unfathomed waters". Moore's introductory essay remains one of the more
complete surveys of the text. And in addition, he published
`<cite>`{=html}Metrical Analysis of the Pāli Iti-vuttaka, a Collection
of Discourses of Buddha`</cite>`{=html} (Journal of the American
Oriental Society, vol. 28 1907), which was an early contribution to the
difficult and still understudied field of Pali meter. On the question of
authorship, Moore suggests that the verses may be older, while the prose
portions "bear all the ear-marks of a short commentary on the succeeding
verses". I find his argumentation here curiously unpersuasive; he
presents a couple of examples in support, but I fail to see how they
relate to his argument. As I mentioned above, I think it is more likely
that to the extent that the prose and verse have separate origins, the
verses were added to the prose.

F.L. Woodward was the next to translate the text into English, under the
title `<cite>`{=html}As It Was Said`</cite>`{=html}. It was published by
the Pali Text Society in 1935 together with his translation of the Udāna
with the collective title, `<cite>`{=html}Minor Anthologies of the Pali
Canon, Part II`</cite>`{=html}. Woodward endorses Moore's view that the
prose is a commentary on the verses. His translation is unfortunately
marred by the then-fashionable tendency to render religious text with
deliberate archaisms. Time has not been kind to these stylings.

As is usual with English translations from the Pali, there is a marked
leap from the first or second-generation translations and those
completed after the work of Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi in the 1950s. All later
translators aspired to his consistency, clarity, and straightforwardness
of diction. The first modern translation of the Itivuttaka was that of
John Ireland, originally published through the Buddhist Publications
Society in 1991, and subsequently reprinted together with his equally
readable translation of the Udāna. It contains a brief introduction and
notes.

Peter Masefield published a highly literal translation in 2000 with the
Pali Text Society. This was a companion to his translation of the
commentary and is intended to present the text as understood by the
commentator. It was completed while the translator was at the University
of Sydney, which makes my translation the second to be done in Sydney.
And since Woodward made his while in Tasmania, mine is the third
translation of the Itivuttaka to be completed in Australia.

Bhikkhu Ṭhānissaro published a translation in 2001 under the title
`<cite>`{=html}This Was Said by the Buddha`</cite>`{=html}, revised with
a new introduction in 2013. In 2018 Anagarika Mahendra (AKA Sāmaṇera
Mahinda) published a "contemporary" translation with both Pali and
English under the title `<cite>`{=html}Book of This Was
Said`</cite>`{=html} through Dhamma Publishers. And a simple English
version is made available by Ven. Gnanananda Thero on his Sutta Friends
website.

</article>

[]{#acknowledgements.xhtml}

<article class="acknowledgements" id="acknowledgements">

# Acknowledgements

I remember with gratitude all those from whom I have learned the Dhamma,
especially Ajahn Brahm and Bhikkhu Bodhi, the two monks who more than
anyone else showed me the depth, meaning, and practical value of the
Suttas.

Special thanks to Dustin and Keiko Cheah and family, who sponsored my
stay in Qi Mei while I made this translation.

Thanks also for Blake Walshe, who provided essential software support
for my translation work.

Throughout the process of translation, I have frequently sought feedback
and suggestions from the SuttaCentral community on our forum, "Discuss
and Discover". I want to thank all those who have made suggestions and
contributed to my understanding, as well as to the moderators who have
made the forum possible. These translations were significantly improved
due to the careful work of my proofreaders: Ayyā Pāsādā, John and Lynn
Kelly, and Derek Sola. Special thanks are due to Sabbamittā, a true
friend of all, who has tirelessly and precisely checked my work.

Finally my everlasting thanks to all those people, far too many to
mention, who have supported SuttaCentral, and those who have supported
my life as a monastic. None of this would be possible without you.

</article>

[]{#iti-ekakanipata.xhtml}

# The Book of the Ones {#iti-ekakanipata.xhtml_iti-ekakanipata .section-title .heading}

## Chapter One {#iti-ekakanipata.xhtml_iti-ekakanipata-pathamavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti1">

### [Iti 1]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lobhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Greed is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by greed\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that greed,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.[1](endnotes.xhtml_note-1){#iti-ekakanipata.xhtml_noteref-1
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

</article>
<article id="iti2">

### [Iti 2]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Hate ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dosasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Hate is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by hate\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that hate,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti3">

### [Iti 3]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Delusion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mohasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Delusion is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by delusion\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that delusion,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti4">

### [Iti 4]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Anger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kodhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Anger is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by anger\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that anger,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti5">

### [Iti 5]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Disdain ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Makkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing. and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Disdain is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return." The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by disdain\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that disdain,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti6">

### [Iti 6]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Conceit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, give up one thing and I guarantee you non-return. What one
thing? Conceit is the one thing. Give it up, and I guarantee you
non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Drunk on conceit,\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that conceit,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti7">

### [Iti 7]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of All ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sabbapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the
all, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding the all,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

That is what the Buddha said. On this it is said:

> "Those who know the all as all,\
> are not attracted to anything.\
> They completely understand all,\
> and have risen above all suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti8">

### [Iti 8]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Conceit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mānapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
conceit, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding conceit,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "These folk are caught up in conceit,\
> tied by conceit, delighting in existence.\
> Not completely understanding conceit,\
> they return in future lives.
>
> Those who have given up conceit,\
> freed in the ending of conceit,\
> vanquishers of the tie of conceit,\
> have risen above all suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti9">

### [Iti 9]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Greed ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lobhapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
greed, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding greed,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by greed\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that greed,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti10">

### [Iti 10]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Hate ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dosapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding hate,
without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end suffering. By
directly knowing and completely understanding hate, having dispassion
for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by hate\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that hate,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-ekakanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Two {#iti-ekakanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml_iti-ekakanipata-dutiyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti11">

### [Iti 11]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Delusion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mohapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
delusion, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding delusion,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by delusion\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that delusion,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti12">

### [Iti 12]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Anger ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kodhapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
anger, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding anger,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by anger\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that anger,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti13">

### [Iti 13]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Complete Understanding of Disdain ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Makkhapariññāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
disdain, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. By directly knowing and completely understanding disdain,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When overcome by disdain\
> beings go to a bad place.\
> Having rightly understood that disdain,\
> the discerning give it up.\
> Once they've given it up,\
> they never return to this world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti14">

### [Iti 14]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Shroud of Ignorance ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avijjānīvaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I do not see a single shroud, shrouded by which people
wander and transmigrate for a long time like the shroud of ignorance.
Shrouded by ignorance, people wander and transmigrate for a long time."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "There is no other thing\
> that shrouds people like ignorance.\
> Veiled by delusion,\
> they transmigrate day and night.
>
> Those who have given up delusion,\
> shattering the mass of darkness,\
> wander no more,\
> the root is not found in them."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti15">

### [Iti 15]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Fetter of Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāsaṁyojanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I do not see a single fetter, fettered by which people
wander and transmigrate for a long time like the fetter of craving.
Fettered by craving, people wander and transmigrate for a long time."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Craving is a person's partner\
> as they transmigrate on this long journey.\
> They go from this state to another,\
> but don't escape transmigration.
>
> Knowing this danger,\
> that craving is the cause of suffering---\
> rid of craving, free of grasping,\
> a mendicant would wander mindful."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti16">

### [Iti 16]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very helpful as rational application of mind for a
trainee mendicant who hasn't achieved their heart's desire, but lives
aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. A mendicant rationally
applying the mind gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "There is nothing so helpful\
> for a trainee mendicant\
> aspiring for the ultimate goal\
> as rational application of mind.\
> Striving rationally, a mendicant\
> attains the end of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti17">

### [Iti 17]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Trainee (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasekhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very helpful as good friendship for a trainee mendicant
who hasn't achieved their heart's desire, but lives aspiring to the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke. A mendicant who has good friends gives
up the unskillful and develops the skillful."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A mendicant with good friends\
> is reverential and respectful\
> when their friends are speaking,\
> aware and mindful.\
> Gradually they would attain\
> the ending of all fetters."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti18">

### [Iti 18]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Schism in the Saṅgha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁghabhedasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"One thing, mendicants, arises in the world for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. What one thing? Schism in the Saṅgha.
When the Saṅgha is split, they argue, insult, block, and forsake each
other. This doesn't inspire confidence in those without it, and it
causes some with confidence to change their minds."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A schismatic remains for the eon\
> in a place of loss, in hell.\
> Taking a stand against the teaching,\
> favoring factions, they ruin their sanctuary.\
> After causing schism in a harmonious Saṅgha,\
> they burn in hell for an eon."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti19">

### [Iti 19]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Harmony in the Saṅgha ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṁghasāmaggīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"One thing, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans. What one thing? Harmony in the Saṅgha.
When the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don't argue, insult, block, or
forsake each other. This inspires confidence in those without it, and
increases confidence in those who have it."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A Saṅgha in harmony is happy,\
> as is support for those in harmony.\
> Taking a stand on the teaching,\
> favoring harmony, they ruin no sanctuary.\
> After creating harmony in the Saṅgha,\
> they rejoice in heaven for an eon."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti20">

### [Iti 20]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Corrupted Mind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paduṭṭhacittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
corrupted, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they
would be cast down to hell.' Why is that? Because their mind is
corrupted. Corruption of mind is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Knowing a person's\
> corrupted mind,\
> the Buddha explained this matter\
> in the mendicants' presence.
>
> If that person\
> were to die at this time,\
> they'd be reborn in hell,\
> for their mind is corrupted.
>
> Such a person is cast down as surely\
> as if they'd been carried off and put there.\
> For corruption of mind is the reason\
> sentient beings go to a bad place."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-ekakanipata-tatiyavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Three {#iti-ekakanipata-tatiyavagga.xhtml_iti-ekakanipata-tatiyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti21">

### [Iti 21]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Pure Mind ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pasannacittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
pure, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they would be
raised up to heaven.' Why is that? Because their mind is pure. Purity of
mind is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Knowing a person's\
> pure mind,\
> the Buddha explained this matter\
> in the mendicants' presence.
>
> If that person\
> were to die at this time,\
> they'd be reborn in heaven,\
> for their mind is pure.
>
> Such a person is raised up as surely\
> as if they'd been carried and put there.\
> For purity of mind is the reason\
> sentient beings go to a good place."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti22">

### [Iti 22]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Love ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mettasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, don't fear good deeds. For 'good deeds' is a term for
happiness, for what is likable, desirable, and agreeable. I recall
undergoing for a long time the likable, desirable, and agreeable results
of good deeds performed over a long time. Having developed a mind of
love for seven years, for seven eons of the cosmos contracting and
expanding I didn't return to this world again. As the eon contracted I
went to the realm of streaming radiance. As it expanded I was reborn in
an empty mansion of divinity.

There I was the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the vanquisher, the
unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power. I was Sakka,
lord of gods, thirty-six times. Many hundreds of times I was a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. My dominion extended
to all four sides, I achieved stability in the country, and I possessed
the seven treasures. Not to mention regional kingship!

Then I thought, 'Of what deed of mine is this the fruit and result, that
I am now so mighty and powerful?' Then I thought, 'It is the fruit and
result of three kinds of deeds: giving, self-control, and restraint.'"

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One should practice only good deeds,\
> whose happy outcome stretches ahead.\
> Giving and moral conduct,\
> developing a mind of love:
>
> having developed these\
> three things yielding happiness,\
> that astute one is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti23">

### [Iti 23]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Both Kinds of Benefit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ubhayatthasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"This one thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, secures
equal benefits for both this life and lives to come. What one thing?
Diligence in skillful qualities. This is the one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, secures equal benefits for both this life and
lives to come."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The astute praise diligence\
> in making merit.\
> Being diligent, an astute person\
> secures both benefits:
>
> the benefit in this life,\
> and in lives to come.\
> Attentive, comprehending the meaning,\
> they are said to be astute."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti24">

### [Iti 24]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Heap of Bones ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aṭṭhipuñjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, one person roaming and transmigrating for an eon would
amass a heap of bones the size of this Mount Vepulla, if they were
gathered together and not lost."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "If the bones of a single person\
> for a single eon were gathered up,\
> they'd make a pile the size of a mountain:\
> so said the great seer.
>
> And this is declared to be\
> as huge as Mount Vepulla,\
> higher than the Vulture's Peak\
> near the Mountainfold of the Magadhans.
>
> But then, with right understanding,\
> a person sees the noble truths---\
> suffering, suffering's origin,\
> suffering's transcendence,\
> and the noble eightfold path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> After roaming on seven times at most,\
> that person\
> makes an end of suffering,\
> with the ending of all fetters."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti25">

### [Iti 25]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Musāvādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, for an individual who transgresses in one thing, there is
no bad deed they would not do, I say. What one thing? It is this:
telling a deliberate lie."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When a person, spurning the hereafter,\
> transgresses in just one thing---\
> lying---\
> there is no evil they would not do."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti26">

### [Iti 26]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, if sentient beings only knew, as I do, the fruit of giving
and sharing, they would not eat without first giving, and the stain of
stinginess would not occupy their minds. They would not eat without
sharing even their last mouthful, their last morsel, so long as there
was someone to receive it. It is because sentient beings do not know, as
I do, the fruit of giving and sharing, that they eat without first
giving, and the stain of stinginess occupies their minds."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "If sentient beings only knew\
> how great is the fruit\
> of giving and sharing\
> as taught by the great seer!
>
> Rid of the stain of stinginess,\
> with clear and confident heart,\
> they would duly give to the noble ones,\
> where a gift is very fruitful.
>
> Having given food in abundance\
> to those worthy of a religious donation,\
> after passing from the human realm,\
> the givers go to heaven.
>
> And when they have arrived there in heaven,\
> they enjoy all the pleasures they desire.\
> The generous enjoy the\
> fruit of giving and sharing."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti27">

### [Iti 27]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Meditation on Love ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mettābhāvanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, of all the grounds for making worldly merit, none are worth
a sixteenth part of the heart's release by love. Surpassing them, the
heart's release by love shines and glows and radiates.

It's like how the radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth
part of the moon's radiance. Surpassing them, the moon's radiance shines
and glows and radiates. In the same way, of all the grounds for making
worldly merit, none are worth a sixteenth part of the heart's release by
love. Surpassing them, the heart's release by love shines and glows and
radiates.

It's like the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the
heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is rising to the
firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it shines and
glows and radiates. In the same way, of all the grounds for making
worldly merit, none are worth a sixteenth part of the heart's release by
love. Surpassing them, the heart's release by love shines and glows and
radiates.

It's like how, at the crack of dawn, the Morning Star shines and glows
and radiates. In the same way, of all the grounds for making worldly
merit, none are worth a sixteenth part of the heart's release by love.
Surpassing them, the heart's release by love shines and glows and
radiates."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A mindful one who develops\
> limitless love\
> weakens the fetters,\
> seeing the ending of attachments.
>
> Loving just one creature with a hateless heart\
> makes you a good person.\
> Sympathetic for all creatures,\
> a noble one creates abundant merit.
>
> The royal potentates conquered this land\
> and traveled around sponsoring sacrifices---\
> horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,\
> the sacrifices of the 'casting of the yoke-pin', the 'royal soma
> drinking', and the 'unimpeded'.
>
> These are not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the mind developed with love,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> Don't kill or cause others to kill,\
> don't conquer or encourage others to conquer,\
> with love for all living creatures---\
> you'll have no enmity for anyone."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-dukanipata.xhtml}

# The Book of the Twos {#iti-dukanipata.xhtml_iti-dukanipata .section-title .heading}

## Chapter One {#iti-dukanipata.xhtml_iti-dukanipata-pathamavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti28">

### [Iti 28]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living in Suffering ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dukkhavihārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has two qualities they live unhappily in
this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What two? Not
guarding the sense doors and eating too much. When a mendicant has these
two qualities they live unhappily in this very life---with distress,
anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect a bad rebirth."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Eye, ear, nose,\
> tongue, body, and likewise mind:\
> a mendicant who leaves these\
> sense doors unguarded---
>
> immoderate in eating,\
> sense faculties unrestrained---\
> reaps suffering\
> both physical and mental.
>
> Burning in body,\
> burning in mind,\
> by day or by night\
> such a person lives in suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti29">

### [Iti 29]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Living in Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukhavihārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has two qualities they live happily in
this very life---without distress, anguish, and fever---and when the
body breaks up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What two?
Guarding the sense doors and moderation in eating. When a mendicant has
these two qualities they live happily in this very life---without
distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks up, after death,
they can expect a good rebirth."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Eye, ear, nose,\
> tongue, body, and likewise mind:\
> a mendicant who makes these\
> sense doors well guarded---
>
> eating in moderation,\
> restrained in the sense faculties---\
> reaps happiness\
> both physical and mental.
>
> Not burning in body,\
> not burning in mind,\
> by day or by night\
> such a person lives in happiness."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti30">

### [Iti 30]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Mortifying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tapanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These two things, mendicants, are mortifying. What two? It's when
someone hasn't done good and skillful things that keep them safe, but
has done bad things, violence and sin. Thinking, 'I haven't done good
things', they're mortified. Thinking, 'I have done bad things', they're
mortified. These are the two things that are mortifying."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Having done bad things\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> and whatever else is corrupt;
>
> not having done good deeds,\
> and having done many bad,\
> when their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti31">

### [Iti 31]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Not Mortifying ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Atapanīyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These two things, mendicants, are not mortifying. What two? It's when
someone has done good and skillful things that keep them safe, but has
not done bad things, violence and sin. Thinking, 'I have done good
things', they're not mortified. Thinking, 'I haven't done bad things',
they're not mortified. These are the two things that are not
mortifying."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Having given up bad conduct\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> and whatever else is corrupt;
>
> not having done bad deeds,\
> and having done many good,\
> when their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in heaven."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti32">

### [Iti 32]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, a person with two qualities is cast down to hell. What two?
Bad conduct and bad view. A person who has these two qualities is cast
down to hell."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "If a person possesses\
> these two qualities---\
> bad conduct\
> and bad views---\
> when their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti33">

### [Iti 33]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ethics (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, a person with two qualities is raised up to heaven. What
two? Excellent conduct and excellent view. A person who has these two
qualities is raised up to heaven."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "If a person possesses\
> these two qualities---\
> excellent conduct\
> and excellent views---\
> when their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in heaven."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti34">

### [Iti 34]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Keen ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ātāpīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, without being keen and prudent a mendicant can't achieve
awakening, extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. But
if a mendicant is keen and prudent they can achieve awakening,
extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Neither keen nor prudent,\
> lazy, lacking energy,\
> full of dullness and drowsiness,\
> unconscientious, lacking regard for others,\
> such a mendicant is incapable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening.
>
> One who is mindful, alert, meditative,\
> keen, prudent, and diligent,\
> having cut the fetter of birth and old age,\
> would experience supreme awakening `<j>`{=html}in this very life."
> `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti35">

### [Iti 35]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deceit and Flattery ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamajananakuhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of deceiving
people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or
popularity, nor thinking, 'So let people know about me!' This spiritual
life is lived for the sake of restraint and giving up."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The Buddha taught the spiritual life\
> not because of tradition,\
> but for the sake of restraint and giving up,\
> and because it culminates in extinguishment.
>
> This is the path followed by the great souls,\
> the great seers.\
> Those who practice it\
> as it was taught by the Buddha\
> doing the teacher's bidding,\
> make an end of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti36">

### [Iti 36]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deceit and Flattery ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyajananakuhanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of deceiving
people or flattering them, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or
popularity, nor thinking, 'So let people know about me!' This spiritual
life is lived for the sake of direct knowledge and complete
understanding."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The Buddha taught the spiritual life\
> not because of tradition,\
> but for the sake of insight and understanding,\
> and because it culminates in extinguishment.
>
> This is the path followed by the great souls,\
> the great seers.\
> Those who practice it\
> as it was taught by the Buddha\
> doing the teacher's bidding,\
> make an end of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti37">

### [Iti 37]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Somanassasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has two qualities they're full of joy and
happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements. What two? Being inspired at inspiring places,
and making a suitable effort when inspired. When a mendicant has these
two qualities they're full of joy and happiness in this very life, and
they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "At inspiring places\
> an astute person should be inspired;\
> a keen and alert mendicant\
> should examine with wisdom.
>
> A mendicant living like this, with keen energy,\
> peaceful not restless,\
> devoted to serenity of heart,\
> attains the ending of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-dukanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Two {#iti-dukanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml_iti-dukanipata-dutiyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti38">

### [Iti 38]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Thoughts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Two thoughts, mendicants, often occur to the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha: the thought of sanctuary, and
that of seclusion. The Realized One loves kindness and delights in it,
so this thought often occurs to him: 'Through this behavior, I shall not
hurt any creature firm or frail.'

The Realized One loves seclusion and delights in it, so this thought
often occurs to him: 'What is unskillful has been given up.'

So, mendicants, you too should love kindness and delight in it, then
this thought will often occur to you: 'Through this behavior, I shall
not hurt any creature firm or frail.'

You too should love seclusion and delight in it, then this thought will
often occur to you: 'What is unskillful? What is not given up? What
should I give up?'"

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Two thoughts occur to him,\
> the Realized One, the bearer of the unbearable:\
> first mentioned was thought of sanctuary,\
> then the second made clear was seclusion.
>
> Dispeller of darkness, the great seer has crossed over:\
> the attained, the master, the undefiled.\
> In the midst of it all, `<j>`{=html}he is freed in the ending of
> craving; `</j>`{=html}\
> that sage bears his final body.\
> He has disposed of Māra, I declare, `<j>`{=html}and gone beyond old
> age. `</j>`{=html}
>
> Standing high on a rocky mountain,\
> you can see the people all around.\
> In just the same way, the all-seer, so intelligent,\
> having ascended the Temple of Truth,\
> rid of sorrow, looks upon the people\
> swamped with sorrow, `<j>`{=html}oppressed by rebirth and old age."
> `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti39">

### [Iti 39]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Desanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha has two approaches to teaching Dhamma. What two? 'See evil as
evil'---this is the first approach to teaching Dhamma. 'Having seen evil
as evil, be disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed from it'---this is
the second approach to teaching Dhamma. The Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha has these two approaches to teaching
Dhamma."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "See the two approaches for\
> explaining the Dhamma\
> used by the Realized One, the Buddha,\
> compassionate for all beings:
>
> see that that is evil,\
> and be dispassionate towards it.\
> Then, with a mind free of desire,\
> you will make an end of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti40">

### [Iti 40]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Knowledge ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vijjāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities,
with lack of conscience and prudence following along. Knowledge precedes
the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience and prudence
following along."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Bad destinies of whatever kind,\
> in this world or the next,\
> are all rooted in ignorance,\
> compounded of greed and desire.
>
> Since one of corrupt wishes is\
> unconscientious, lacking regard for others,\
> they create much wickedness,\
> which sends them to a place of loss.
>
> Therefore, dispelling desire\
> and greed and ignorance,\
> a mendicant arousing knowledge\
> would cast off all bad destinies."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti41">

### [Iti 41]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bereft of Wisdom ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paññāparihīnasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Those sentient beings are truly bereft, mendicants, who are bereft of
noble wisdom. They live unhappily in this very life---with distress,
anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect a bad rebirth. Those sentient beings are not bereft who are not
bereft of noble wisdom. In this very life they're happy---free of
distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks up, after death,
they can expect a good rebirth."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "See the world with its gods,\
> bereft of wisdom,\
> habituated to name and form,\
> imagining this is truth.
>
> Wisdom is best in the world,\
> as it leads to penetration,\
> through which one rightly understands\
> the ending of rebirth and continued existence.
>
> Gods and humans envy them,\
> the Buddhas, ever mindful,\
> of laughing wisdom,\
> bearing their final body."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti42">

### [Iti 42]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bright Things ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukkadhammasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These two bright things, mendicants, protect the world. What two?
Conscience and prudence. If these two bright things did not protect the
world, there would be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or
wives and partners of tutors and respected people. The world would
become dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals. But because the two bright things protect the world, there is
recognition of the status of mother, aunts, and wives and partners of
tutors and respected people."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Those in whom conscience and prudence\
> are never found at all,\
> have lost their bright roots,\
> and fare on in birth and death.
>
> Those in whom conscience and prudence\
> are always rightly established,\
> thrive in the spiritual life;\
> being at peace, they will not be reborn again."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti43">

### [Iti 43]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Free of Rebirth ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Ajātasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"There is, mendicants, freedom from rebirth, freedom from what has been
produced, made, and conditioned. If there were no freedom from rebirth,
freedom from what has been produced, made, and conditioned, then you
would find no escape here from rebirth, from what has been produced,
made, and conditioned. But since there is freedom from rebirth, freedom
from what has been produced, made, and conditioned, an escape is found
from rebirth, from what has been produced, made, and conditioned."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "What's reborn, produced, and arisen,\
> made, conditioned, not lasting,\
> wrapped in old age and death,\
> frail, a nest of disease,
>
> generated by food and the conduit to rebirth:\
> that's not fit to delight in.\
> The escape from that is peaceful,\
> beyond the scope of logic, everlasting,
>
> where nothing is reborn or arisen,\
> the sorrowless, stainless state,\
> the cessation of all painful things,\
> the blissful stilling of conditions."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti44">

### [Iti 44]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements of Extinguishment ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nibbānadhātusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"There are, mendicants, these two elements of extinguishment. What two?
The element of extinguishment with residue, and the element of
extinguishment with no residue.

And what is the element of extinguishment with residue? It's when a
mendicant is a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment. Their five sense
faculties still remain. So long as their senses have not gone they
continue to experience the agreeable and disagreeable, to feel pleasure
and pain. The ending of greed, hate, and delusion in them is called the
element of extinguishment with residue.

And what is the element of extinguishment with no residue? It's when a
mendicant is a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment. For them,
everything that's felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right
here. This is called the element of extinguishment with no residue.
These are the two elements of extinguishment."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "These two elements of extinguishment `<j>`{=html}have been explained
> `</j>`{=html}\
> by the Clear-eyed One, `<j>`{=html}the unattached, the unaffected.
> `</j>`{=html}\
> One element pertains to this life---\
> that with residue `<j>`{=html}though the conduit to rebirth has ended;
> `</j>`{=html}\
> and that with no residue, `<j>`{=html}which pertains to what follows
> this life, `</j>`{=html}\
> where all states of existence cease.
>
> Those who have fully understood `<j>`{=html}the unconditioned
> state---`</j>`{=html}\
> their minds freed, the conduit to rebirth ended---\
> attained to the heart of the Dhamma, `<j>`{=html}they delight in
> ending, `</j>`{=html}\
> the unaffected ones have given up `<j>`{=html}all states of
> existence." `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti45">

### [Iti 45]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Retreat ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭisallānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Enjoy retreat, mendicants, love retreat. Be committed to inner serenity
of the heart, don't neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and
frequent empty huts. A mendicant who enjoys retreat can expect one of
two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something
left over, non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "With minds at peace, alert,\
> mindful and meditative,\
> they rightly discern the Dhamma,\
> unconcerned for sensual pleasures.
>
> Delighting in diligence, peaceful,\
> seeing fear in negligence,\
> such a one can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti46">

### [Iti 46]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Benefits of Training ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sikkhānisaṁsasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, live with training as benefit, with wisdom as overseer,
with freedom as core, and with mindfulness as ruler. A mendicant who
lives in this way can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this
very life, or if there's something left over, non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The training fulfilled, not liable to decline,\
> overseen by wisdom, seer of rebirth's end;\
> that sage bears their final body;\
> they have disposed of Māra, I declare, `<j>`{=html}and gone beyond old
> age. `</j>`{=html}
>
> Therefore be always enjoying absorption, `<j>`{=html}immersed in
> samādhi, `</j>`{=html}\
> energetic, seers of rebirth's end.\
> Having overcome Māra and his armies, mendicants,\
> go beyond birth and death."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti47">

### [Iti 47]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wake Up ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jāgariyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"A mendicant should meditate wakeful, mendicants, mindful and aware,
joyful and clear, and at times discern the skillful qualities in that
state. A mendicant who meditates in this way can expect one of two
results: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something left
over, non-return."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Listen up, wakeful ones!\
> And those asleep, wake up!\
> Wakefulness is better than sleep,\
> the wakeful have nothing to fear.
>
> Those who are wakeful, mindful and aware,\
> immersed in samādhi, joyful and clear,\
> rightly investigating the Dhamma in good time,\
> at one, would banish the darkness.
>
> That's why you should apply yourself to wakefulness.\
> A keen and alert mendicant, possessing absorption,\
> having cut the fetter of birth and old age,\
> would experience supreme awakening `<j>`{=html}in this very life."
> `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti48">

### [Iti 48]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bound for Loss ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āpāyikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these two are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell, if
they don't give up this fault. What two? Someone who is unchaste, but
claims to be celibate; and someone who makes a groundless accusation of
unchastity against a person whose celibacy is pure. These are the two
who are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell, if they don't give up
this fault."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A liar goes to hell,\
> as does one who denies what they did.\
> Both are equal in the hereafter,\
> those men of base deeds.
>
> Many who wear a scrap of ocher
> cloth[2](endnotes.xhtml_note-2){#iti-dukanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml_noteref-2
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> are unrestrained and wicked.\
> Being wicked, they are reborn in hell\
> due to their bad deeds.
>
> It'd be better for the immoral and unrestrained\
> to eat an iron ball,\
> scorching, like a burning flame,\
> than to eat the nation's alms."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti49">

### [Iti 49]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Misconceptions ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Diṭṭhigatasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Overcome by two misconceptions, mendicants, some gods and humans get
stuck, some overreach, while those with vision see.

And how do some get stuck? Because of love, delight, and enjoyment of
existence, when the Dhamma is being taught for the cessation of
existence, the minds of some gods and humans do not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided. That is how some get stuck.

And how do some overreach? Some, becoming horrified, repelled, and
disgusted with existence, delight in ending existence: 'When this self
is annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist
after death: that is peaceful, that is sublime, that is how it is.' That
is how some overreach.

And how do those with vision see? It's when a mendicant sees what has
come to be as having come to be. Seeing this, they are practicing for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding what has come to
be. That is how those with vision see."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Those who see what has come to be `<j>`{=html}as having come to be,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> and see the transcendence of what has come to be,\
> are freed in accord with the truth,\
> with the ending of craving for continued existence.
>
> They completely understand what has come to be,\
> rid of craving for rebirth in this or that state,\
> with the disappearance of what has come to be,\
> a mendicant does not come back to future lives."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-tikanipata.xhtml}

# The Book of the Threes {#iti-tikanipata.xhtml_iti-tikanipata .section-title .heading}

## Chapter One {#iti-tikanipata.xhtml_iti-tikanipata-pathamavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti50">

### [Iti 50]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Roots ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Mūlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three unskillful roots. What three? Greed,
hate, and delusion. These are the three unskillful roots."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When greed, hate, and delusion,\
> have arisen inside oneself,\
> they harm a person of wicked heart,\
> as a reed is destroyed by its own fruit."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti51">

### [Iti 51]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhātusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three elements. What three? The elements of
form, formlessness, and cessation. These are the three elements."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Comprehending the element of form,\
> not stuck in the formless,\
> those who are released in cessation,\
> they are conquerors of death.
>
> Having directly experienced `<j>`{=html}the element free of death,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> free of attachments;\
> having realised relinquishment\
> of attachments, the undefiled\
> fully awakened Buddha teaches\
> the sorrowless, stainless state."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti52">

### [Iti 52]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Feelings (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamavedanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings. What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Stilled, aware,\
> a mindful disciple of the Buddha\
> understands feelings,\
> the cause of feelings,
>
> where they cease,\
> and the path that leads to their ending.\
> With the ending of feelings, a mendicant\
> is hungerless, quenched."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti53">

### [Iti 53]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Feelings (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyavedanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings. What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. Pleasant feeling should be seen as
suffering. Painful feeling should be seen as a dart. Neutral feeling
should be seen as impermanent. When a mendicant has seen these three
feelings in this way, they're called a noble mendicant who sees rightly,
has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending
conceit has made an end of suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A mendicant who sees pleasure as pain,\
> and suffering as a dart,\
> and that peaceful, neutral feeling\
> as impermanent
>
> sees rightly.\
> And when freed in regards to that,\
> that peaceful sage, with perfect insight,\
> has truly slipped their yokes."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti54">

### [Iti 54]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Searches (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaesanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Stilled, aware,\
> a mindful disciple of the Buddha\
> understands searches,\
> the cause of searches,
>
> where they cease,\
> and the path that leads to their ending.\
> With the ending of searches, a mendicant\
> is hungerless, quenched."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti55">

### [Iti 55]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Searches (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaesanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The search for sensual pleasures, for a good rebirth,\
> and the search for a spiritual path;\
> the holding tight to the thought, 'this is the truth',\
> and the mass of grounds for views---
>
> for one detached from all lusts,\
> freed by the ending of craving,\
> that searching has been relinquished,\
> and those viewpoints eradicated.\
> With the ending of searches, a mendicant\
> is free of hope and indecision."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti56">

### [Iti 56]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Defilements (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamaāsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three defilements. What three? The
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are
the three defilements."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Stilled, aware,\
> a mindful disciple of the Buddha\
> understands defilements,\
> the cause of defilements,
>
> where they cease,\
> and the path that leads to their ending.\
> With the ending of defilements, a mendicant\
> is hungerless, quenched."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti57">

### [Iti 57]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Defilements (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyaāsavasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three defilements. What three? The
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are
the three defilements."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One who has ended the defilement of sensuality,\
> whose ignorance has faded away,\
> and whose desire to be reborn is finished---\
> liberated, free of attachments,\
> they bear their final body,\
> having vanquished Māra and his mount."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti58">

### [Iti 58]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three cravings. What three? Craving for
sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end
existence. These are the three cravings."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Bound by craving, minds full of desire\
> for rebirth in this or that state,\
> yoked by Māra's yoke, these people\
> find no sanctuary from the yoke.\
> Sentient beings continue to transmigrate,\
> with ongoing birth and death.
>
> Those who have given up craving,\
> rid of craving for rebirth in this or that state,\
> they in this world have truly crossed over,\
> having reached the ending of defilements."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti59">

### [Iti 59]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Māra's Dominion ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Māradheyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, a mendicant with these three qualities has slipped free of
Māra's dominion and shines like the sun. What three? It's when they have
the entire spectrum of the adept's ethics, immersion, and wisdom. A
mendicant with these three qualities has slipped free of Māra's dominion
and shines like the sun."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Whoever has well developed\
> ethics, immersion, and wisdom\
> has slipped free of Māra's dominion\
> and shines like the sun."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-tikanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Two {#iti-tikanipata-dutiyavagga.xhtml_iti-tikanipata-dutiyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti60">

### [Iti 60]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Grounds for Making Merit ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puññakiriyavatthusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three grounds for making merit. What three?
Giving, ethical conduct, and meditation are all grounds for making
merit. These are the three grounds for making merit."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One should practice only good deeds,\
> whose happy outcome stretches ahead.\
> Giving and moral conduct,\
> developing a mind of love:
>
> having developed these\
> three things yielding happiness,\
> that astute one is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti61">

### [Iti 61]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Eye ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Cakkhusutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three eyes. What three? The eye of the
flesh, the eye of clairvoyance, and the eye of wisdom. These are the
three eyes."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The eye of flesh, the clairvoyant eye,\
> the supreme eye of wisdom:\
> these three eyes\
> were taught by the supreme person.
>
> The arising of the eye of flesh\
> is the path to the clairvoyant eye.\
> When knowledge arises---\
> the supreme eye of wisdom---\
> one who gains that eye\
> is released from all suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti62">

### [Iti 62]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Faculties ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Indriyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three faculties. What three? The faculty of
understanding that one's enlightenment is imminent. The faculty of
enlightenment. The faculty of one who is enlightened. These are the
three faculties."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "As a trainee trains,\
> following the straight road,\
> first they know about ending;\
> enlightenment follows in the same lifetime.
>
> Then the knowledge comes\
> to such a one, freed through enlightenment,\
> with the end of the fetters of continued existence:\
> 'My freedom is unshakable.'
>
> Accomplished in the faculties,\
> peaceful, in love with the state of peace,\
> they bear their final body,\
> having vanquished Māra and his mount."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti63">

### [Iti 63]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Periods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Addhāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three periods. What three? Past, future,
and present. These are the three periods."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Sentient beings who perceive the communicable,\
> become established in the communicable.\
> Not understanding the communicable,\
> they fall under the yoke of Death.
>
> But having fully understood the communicable,\
> they don't conceive a communicator,\
> as they've touched liberation with their mind,\
> the supreme state of peace.
>
> Accomplished in the communicable,\
> peaceful, in love with the state of peace;\
> making use after reflection, firm in principle,\
> a knowledge master cannot be reckoned."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti64">

### [Iti 64]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Bad Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Duccaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of bad conduct. What three? Bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of
bad conduct."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Having done bad things\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> and whatever else is corrupt;
>
> not having done good deeds,\
> and having done many bad,\
> when their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti65">

### [Iti 65]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Conduct ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sucaritasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these kinds of good conduct. What three? Good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of
good conduct." The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Having given up bad conduct\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> and whatever else is corrupt;
>
> not having done bad deeds,\
> and having done many good,\
> when their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in heaven."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti66">

### [Iti 66]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Purity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Soceyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of purity."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Purity of body, purity of speech,\
> and undefiled purity of heart.\
> A pure person, blessed with purity,\
> has given up everything, they say."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti67">

### [Iti 67]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Sagacity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Moneyyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. What three?
Sagacity of body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of
sagacity." The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "A sage in body, a sage in speech,\
> a sage undefiled in mind;\
> a sage, blessed with sagacity,\
> has washed off all bad things, they say."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti68">

### [Iti 68]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greed (1st) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Paṭhamarāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Whoever has not given up greed, hate, and delusion is said to be
trapped. They're caught in Māra's snare, and the Wicked One can do with
them what he wants. Whoever has given up greed, hate, and delusion is
said to be free. They're released from Māra's snare, and the Wicked One
cannot do with them what he wants."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Those in whom greed, hate, and ignorance\
> have faded away,\
> belong with those who are evolved;\
> A manifestation of divinity, realized,\
> awakened, beyond enmity and fear,\
> they've given up everything, they say."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti69">

### [Iti 69]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Greed (2nd) ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dutiyarāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Whoever has not given up greed, hate, and delusion is said to have not
crossed over the ocean with its waves and whirlpools, its saltwater
crocodiles and monsters. Whoever has given up greed, hate, and delusion
is said to have crossed over the ocean with its waves and whirlpools,
its saltwater crocodiles and monsters. Crossed over and gone beyond,
that brahmin stands on the shore."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Those in whom greed, hate, and ignorance\
> have faded away,\
> have crossed the ocean so hard to cross,\
> with its saltwater crocodiles and monsters, `<j>`{=html}its waves and
> dangers. `</j>`{=html}
>
> They've slipped their snares, given up death, and have no
> attachments.\
> They've given up suffering, `<j>`{=html}so there are no more future
> lives. `</j>`{=html}\
> They've come to an end and cannot be defined;\
> they've confounded the King of Death, I say."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-tikanipata-tatiyavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Three {#iti-tikanipata-tatiyavagga.xhtml_iti-tikanipata-tatiyavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti70">

### [Iti 70]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Having Wrong View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Micchādiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I've seen beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech,
and mind, who denounced the noble ones, who had wrong views and acted
accordingly. At the breaking up of the body, after death, they were
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When the mind has been misdirected,\
> and words wrongly spoken,\
> and wrong bodily deeds have been done,\
> a person here
>
> unlearned, doer of bad deeds,\
> though their life may be short,\
> when their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti71">

### [Iti 71]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Having Right View ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sammādiṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I've seen beings who engaged in good conduct of body,
speech, and mind, who did not denounce the noble ones, who held right
view and acted accordingly. At the breaking up of the body, after death,
they were reborn in a good destination, a heavenly realm.

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When the mind has been directed right,\
> and words rightly spoken,\
> and right bodily deeds have been done,\
> a person here
>
> learned, doer of good deeds,\
> though their life may be short,\
> when their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in heaven."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti72">

### [Iti 72]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Elements of Escape ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nissaraṇiyasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three elements of escape. What three?
Renunciation is the escape from sensual pleasures. Formlessness is the
escape from form. Cessation is the escape from whatever is created,
conditioned, and dependently originated. These are the three elements of
escape."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Knowing the escape from sensuality,\
> and form's transcendence,\
> one always keen touches\
> the stilling of all activities.
>
> That mendicant sees rightly,\
> and when freed in regards to that,\
> that peaceful sage, with perfect insight,\
> has truly slipped their yoke."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti73">

### [Iti 73]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [More Peaceful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Santatarasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, formless states are more peaceful than states of form;
cessation is more peaceful than formless states."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "There are beings in the realm of luminous form,\
> and others stuck in the formless.\
> Not understanding cessation,\
> they return in future lives.
>
> But the people who completely understand form,\
> not stuck in the formless,\
> released in cessation---\
> they are conquerors of death.
>
> Having directly experienced `<j>`{=html}the element free of death,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> free of attachments;\
> having realised relinquishment\
> of attachments, the undefiled\
> fully awakened Buddha teaches\
> the sorrowless, stainless state."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti74">

### [Iti 74]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Child ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Puttasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These three kinds of children are found in the world. What three? One
who betters their birth, one who equals their birth, one who fails their
birth.

And how does a child better their birth? It's when a child's parents
have not gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha.
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're immoral, of bad
character. But their child has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha. They don't kill living creatures, steal,
commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. They're ethical, of good character. That's how a child
betters their birth.

And how does a child equal their birth? It's when a child's parents have
gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're ethical, of good character.
And their child has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha. They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're
ethical, of good character. That's how a child equals their birth.

And how does a child fail their birth? It's when a child's parents have
gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're ethical, of good character.
But their child has not gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha. They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're immoral, of
bad character. That's how a child fails their birth. These are the three
kinds of children found in the world."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The astute wish for a child\
> who betters or equals their birth;\
> not one who fails their birth,\
> disgracing their family.
>
> These are the children in the world\
> who become lay devotees;\
> faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess.\
> Like the moon freed from clouds,\
> they shine in the assemblies."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti75">

### [Iti 75]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A Rainless Cloud ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Avuṭṭhikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three? One
like a rainless cloud, one who rains locally, one who rains all over.

And how is a person like a rainless cloud? It's when a person doesn't
give to anyone at all---whether ascetics and brahmins, paupers,
vagrants, supplicants, or beggars---such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. That's how a person is like a rainless cloud.

And how does a person rain locally? It's when a person gives to some but
not to others---whether ascetics and brahmins, paupers, vagrants,
supplicants, or beggars---such things as food, drink, clothing,
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.
That's how a person rains locally.

And how does a person rain all over? It's when a person gives to
everyone---whether ascetics and brahmins, paupers, vagrants,
supplicants, or beggars---such things as food, drink, clothing,
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.
That's how a person rains all over. These are the three people found in
the world."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "They don't share the food and drink\
> they have acquired\
> with ascetics or brahmins,\
> with paupers, vagrants, or supplicants.\
> They're like a rainless cloud,\
> they say, the meanest of men.
>
> They don't give to some,\
> to some they provide.\
> They rain locally,\
> so say the wise.
>
> Compassionate for all beings,\
> that person distributes\
> abundant food upon request,\
> saying, "Give! Give!"
>
> The rain cloud rains forth,\
> having thundered and roared,\
> drenching the earth with water,\
> soaking the uplands and valleys.
>
> Even so, such a person,\
> having accumulated wealth\
> by legitimate means,\
> through their own hard work,\
> rightly satisfies with food and drink\
> those who have become supplicants."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti76">

### [Iti 76]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Wishing for Happiness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sukhapatthanāsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, an astute person who wishes for three kinds of happiness
should take care of their ethics. What three? 'May I be be praised!'
'May I become rich!' 'When my body breaks up, after death, may I be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm!' An astute person who wishes
for these three kinds of happiness should protect their precepts."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Wishing for three kinds of happiness---\
> praise, prosperity,\
> and to delight in heaven after passing away---\
> the wise would take care of their ethics.
>
> Though you do no wrong,\
> if you associate with one who does,\
> you're suspected of wrong,\
> and your disrepute grows.
>
> Whatever kind of friend you make,\
> with whom you associate,\
> that's how you become,\
> for so it is when you share your life.
>
> The one who associates and the one associated with,\
> the one contacted and the one who contacts another,\
> are like an arrow smeared with poison\
> that contaminates the quiver.\
> The attentive, fearing contamination,\
> would never have wicked friends.
>
> A man who wraps\
> putrid fish in blades of grass\
> makes the grass stink---\
> so it is when associating with fools.
>
> But one who wraps\
> sandalwood incense in leaves\
> makes the leaves fragrant---\
> so it is when associating with the attentive.
>
> So, knowing they'll end up\
> like the wrapping, the astute\
> would shun the wicked,\
> and befriend the good.\
> The wicked lead you to hell,\
> the good help you to a good place."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti77">

### [Iti 77]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fragile ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bhidurasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"This body is fragile, mendicants, consciousness is liable to fade away,
and all attachments are impermanent, suffering, and perishable."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Knowing that the body is fragile,\
> that consciousness is
> faded,[3](endnotes.xhtml_note-3){#iti-tikanipata-tatiyavagga.xhtml_noteref-3
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> and seeing the danger in attachments,\
> they go beyond birth and death.\
> Having attained ultimate peace,\
> evolved, they await their time."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti78">

### [Iti 78]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Converging Elements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhātusosaṁsandanasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: Those who have bad convictions come together and converge with
those who have bad convictions. Those who have good convictions come
together and converge with those who have good convictions.

In the past ...

In the future ...

At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of
an element. Those who have bad convictions come together and converge
with those who have bad convictions. Those who have good convictions
come together and converge with those who have good convictions."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Socializing promotes entanglements;\
> they're cut off by being aloof.\
> If you're lost in the middle of a great sea,\
> and you clamber up on a little log, you'll sink.
>
> So too, a person who lives well\
> sinks by relying on a lazy person.\
> Hence you should avoid such\
> a lazy person who lacks energy.
>
> Dwell with the noble ones\
> who are secluded and determined\
> constantly energetic,\
> the astute who practice absorption."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti79">

### [Iti 79]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Decline ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Parihānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These three things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
three? It's when a mendicant relishes work, talk, and sleep. These three
things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These three things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.
What three? It's when a mendicant doesn't relish work, talk, and sleep.
These three things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Restless, they relish\
> work, talk, and sleep.\
> Such a mendicant is incapable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening.
>
> That's why one ought have few duties,\
> being wakeful not restless.\
> Such a mendicant is capable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Four {#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml_iti-catutthavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti80">

### [Iti 80]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Thoughts ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Vitakkasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three unskillful thoughts. What three? The
thought of status; of getting material things, honor, and popularity;
and of fondness for others. These are the three unskillful thoughts."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One concerned with being looked up to,\
> with possessions, honor, and respect,\
> with sharing joys with friends,\
> is far from the ending of fetters.
>
> But one who gives up children and herds,\
> marriage and acquisitions---\
> such a mendicant is capable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti81">

### [Iti 81]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Esteem ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sakkārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"I've seen, mendicants, sentient beings whose minds are overcome and
overwhelmed by honor. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

I've seen sentient beings whose minds are overcome and overwhelmed by
not being honored. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

I've seen sentient beings whose minds are overcome and overwhelmed by
both honor and by not being honored. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Whether they're honored\
> or not honored, or both,\
> their immersion doesn't waver\
> as they live diligently.
>
> They persistently practice absorption\
> with subtle view and discernment.\
> Rejoicing in the ending of grasping,\
> they're said to be a true person."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti82">

### [Iti 82]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Cry of the Gods ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devasaddasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these three cries are uttered among the gods on occasion.
What three? When a noble disciple shaves off their hair and beard,
dresses in ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness, the gods cry out: 'This noble disciple intends to join
battle with Māra!' This is the first occasion a cry is uttered among the
gods.

Furthermore, when a noble disciple meditates pursuing the development of
the seven qualities that lead to awakening, the gods cry out: 'This
noble disciple is joining battle with Māra!' This is the second occasion
a cry is uttered among the gods.

Furthermore, when a noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, the
gods cry out: 'This noble disciple has won victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle!' This is the third occasion
a cry is uttered among the gods. These are the three cries that are
uttered among the gods on occasion."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Seeing the winner of the battle---\
> a disciple of the Buddha,\
> great of heart, intrepid---\
> even the deities revere them:
>
> 'Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> You won a battle hard to win!\
> Having defeated the army of death,\
> your liberation is unhindered.'
>
> And so the deities revere the one,\
> who has achieved their heart's desire.\
> For they see nothing in them by means of which\
> they might fall under the sway of Death."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti83">

### [Iti 83]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Five Warning Signs ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Pañcapubbanimittasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, when a god is due to pass away from the realm of the gods,
five warning signs appear. Their flower-garlands wither; their clothes
become soiled; they sweat from the armpits; their physical appearance
deteriorates; and they no longer delight in their heavenly
throne.[4](endnotes.xhtml_note-4){#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml_noteref-4
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} When the other gods know that that god is
due to pass away, they wish them well in three ways: 'Sir, may you go
from here to a good place!

When you have gone to a good place, may you be blessed with good
fortune!

When you have been blessed with good fortune, may you become well
grounded!'"

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, what
do the gods reckon to be going to a good place?

What do they reckon to be blessed with good fortune?

What do they reckon to become well grounded?"

"It is human existence, mendicant, that the gods reckon to be going to a
good place.

When a human being gains faith in the teaching and training proclaimed
by the Realized One, that is what the gods reckon to be blessed with
good fortune.

When that faith in the Realized One is settled, rooted, and planted
deep; when it's strong and can't be shifted by any ascetic or brahmin or
god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world, that is what the gods
reckon to become well grounded."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When, with the fading of life,\
> a god passes from the realm of the gods,\
> the gods utter three cries\
> of well-wishing:
>
> 'Sir, go from here to a good place,\
> in the company of humans.\
> As a human being, gain supreme faith\
> in the true teaching.
>
> May that faith of yours be settled,\
> with roots planted deep,\
> unfaltering all life long\
> in the true teaching so well proclaimed.
>
> Having given up bad conduct\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> and whatever else is corrupt;
>
> and having done much good,\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> limitless, free of attachments;
>
> then, having made much worldly merit\
> by giving gifts,\
> establish other colleagues\
> in the true teaching, the spiritual life.'
>
> It is due to such sympathy\
> that when the gods know a god\
> is due to pass away, they wish them well:\
> 'Come back, god, again and again!'"

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti84">

### [Iti 84]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [For the Welfare of the People ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahujanahitasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"These three people, mendicants, arise in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. What three? It's when a
Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. This is the first person who arises in the world for the
welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

Furthermore, it's when a mendicant is a perfected one, with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment. They teach Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they
reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. This is the
second person who arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of
the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

Furthermore, it's when a disciple of that Teacher is a trainee, a
learned practitioner with precepts and observances intact. They teach
Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. This is the third person who arises in
the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans. These are the three people who arise in the world for the
welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The Teacher is the first, the great seer,\
> following whom is the evolved disciple,\
> and then a trainee, a practitioner,\
> learned, with precepts and observances intact.
>
> These three are first among gods and humans,\
> beacons proclaiming the teaching!\
> They fling open the door to freedom from death,\
> freeing many from yokes.
>
> Following the path so well taught\
> by the unsurpassed caravan leader,\
> those who are diligent in the Holy One's teaching\
> make an end of suffering in this very life."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti85">

### [Iti 85]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Observing Ugliness ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Asubhānupassīsutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, meditate observing the ugliness of the body. Let
mindfulness of breathing be well-established internally in your
presence. Meditate observing the impermanence of all conditions. As you
meditate observing the ugliness of the body, you will give up desire for
the body. When mindfulness of breathing is well-established internally
in your presence, there will be no distressing external thoughts or
wishes. When you meditate observing the impermanence of all conditions,
ignorance is given up and knowledge arises."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Observing the ugliness of the body,\
> mindful of the breath,\
> one always keen sees\
> the stilling of all activities.
>
> That mendicant sees rightly,\
> and when freed in regards to that,\
> that peaceful sage, with perfect insight,\
> has truly slipped their yoke."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti86">

### [Iti 86]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Practicing In Line With the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dhammānudhammapaṭipannasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Regarding a mendicant practicing in line with the teaching, it is in
line with the teaching to declare that this is what it means to practice
in line with the teaching. When speaking, they speak in line with the
teaching, not against it. When thinking, they think in line with the
teaching, not against it. And rejecting both, they meditate staying
equanimous, mindful and aware."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Delighting in the teaching, enjoying the teaching,\
> contemplating the teaching,\
> a mendicant who recollects the teaching\
> doesn't decline in the true teaching.
>
> Whether walking or standing,\
> sitting or lying down,\
> with mind collected inside,\
> they attain only peace."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti87">

### [Iti 87]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Destroyers of Sight ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Andhakaraṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these three unskillful thoughts are destroyers of sight,
vision, and knowledge. They block wisdom, they're on the side of
distress, and they don't lead to extinguishment. What three? Thoughts of
sensuality, malice, and cruelty. These are the three unskillful thoughts
that are destroyers of sight, vision, and knowledge. They block wisdom,
they're on the side of distress, and they don't lead to extinguishment.

These three skillful thoughts are creators of sight, vision, and
knowledge. They grow wisdom, they're on the side of solace, and they
lead to extinguishment. What three? Thoughts of renunciation, good will,
and harmlessness. These are the three skillful thoughts that are
creators of sight, vision, and knowledge. They grow wisdom, they're on
the side of solace, and they lead to extinguishment."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Think the three skillful thoughts,\
> and get rid of the unskillful.\
> Quelling such thoughts and considerations,\
> like rain on the dust,\
> with a heart calmed of thought,\
> you'll touch the state of peace right here."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti88">

### [Iti 88]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Inner Stains ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Antarāmalasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three inner stains, inner foes, inner
enemies, inner killers, and inner adversaries. What three? Greed, hate,
and delusion. These three are inner stains, inner foes, inner enemies,
inner killers, and inner adversaries."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Greed creates harm;\
> greed upsets the mind.\
> That person doesn't recognize\
> the danger that arises within.
>
> A greedy person doesn't know the good.\
> A greedy person doesn't see the truth.\
> When a person is beset by greed,\
> only blind darkness is left.
>
> Those who have given up greed,\
> don't get greedy even when provoked.\
> Greed falls off them\
> like a drop from a lotus-leaf.
>
> Hate creates harm;\
> hate upsets the mind.\
> That person doesn't recognize\
> the danger that arises within.
>
> A hateful person doesn't know the good.\
> A hateful person doesn't see the truth.\
> When a person is beset by hate,\
> only blind darkness is left.
>
> Those who have given up hate,\
> don't get angry even when provoked.\
> Hate falls off them\
> like a palm-leaf from its stem.
>
> Delusion creates harm;\
> delusion upsets the mind.\
> That person doesn't recognize\
> the danger that arises within.
>
> A deluded person doesn't know the good.\
> A deluded person doesn't see the truth.\
> When a person is beset by delusion,\
> only blind darkness is left.
>
> Those who have given up delusion,\
> don't get deluded even when provoked.\
> They banish all delusion,\
> as the rising sun the dark."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti89">

### [Iti 89]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [About Devadatta ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Devadattasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, overcome and overwhelmed by three things that oppose the
true teaching, Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to hell, there to
remain for an eon, irredeemable. What three? Corrupt wishes ... Bad
friendship ... When there is still more to be done, stopping half-way
after achieving some insignificant distinction. Overcome and overwhelmed
by these three things that oppose the true teaching, Devadatta is going
to a place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Let none of wicked desire\
> ever be reborn into this world.\
> And by this too you should know\
> the place where those of corrupt wishes go.
>
> He once was considered astute,\
> deemed to be evolved,\
> his glory stood forth like a flame,\
> the renowned
> Devadatta.[5](endnotes.xhtml_note-5){#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml_noteref-5
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> Seduced by heedlessness,\
> he attacked the Realized One.\
> He has fallen to Avīci
> hell,[6](endnotes.xhtml_note-6){#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml_noteref-6
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> four-doored and
> terrifying.[7](endnotes.xhtml_note-7){#iti-catutthavagga.xhtml_noteref-7
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}
>
> When someone betrays the innocent,\
> who have done no wrong,\
> their bad deeds impact the one\
> with corrupt heart, lacking regard for others.
>
> One might think to pollute\
> the ocean with a pot of poison,\
> but it wouldn't work,\
> for the sea is terribly large.
>
> So too when someone attacks\
> with words the Realized One---\
> rightly comported, of peaceful mind---\
> the words don't take.
>
> The astute would befriend one like this,\
> and follow them around.\
> A mendicant who walks the path\
> attains the ending of suffering."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml}

## Chapter Five {#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml_iti-pancamavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti90">

### [Iti 90]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Best Kinds of Confidence ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggappasādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these three kinds of confidence are the best. What three?
Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. Those who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence
in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or
unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst,
the abolishing of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. Those who have
confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best.
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The Saṅgha of the Realized One's disciples is said to be the best of all
communities and groups. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy
of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world. Those who have confidence in the
Saṅgha have confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the
result is the best. These are the three best kinds of confidence."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "For those who, knowing the best teaching,\
> base their confidence on the best---\
> confident in the best Awakened One,\
> supremely worthy of a religious donation;
>
> confident in the best teaching,\
> the bliss of fading and stilling;\
> confident in the best Saṅgha,\
> the supreme field of merit---
>
> giving gifts to the best,\
> the best of merit grows:\
> the best lifespan, beauty,\
> fame, reputation, happiness, and strength.
>
> An intelligent person gives to the best,\
> settled on the best teaching.\
> When they become a god or human,\
> they rejoice at reaching the best."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti91">

### [Iti 91]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Lifestyle ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Jīvikasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"This is the last of lifestyles, mendicants, namely relying on
alms.[8](endnotes.xhtml_note-8){#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml_noteref-8
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} The world curses you: 'You beggar, walking
bowl in hand!' Yet earnest gentlemen take it up for a good reason. Not
to escape a summons by a king or a summons for a bandit, or because you
were in debt or in fear, or in order to make a
living.[9](endnotes.xhtml_note-9){#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml_noteref-9
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Rather, because they think: 'I'm swamped by
rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. Hopefully I can
find an end to this entire mass of suffering.' That's how this gentleman
has gone forth. Yet they covet sensual pleasures; they're infatuated,
full of ill will and malicious intent. They are unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties. Suppose there was a firebrand for lighting a
funeral pyre, burning at both ends, and smeared with dung in the middle.
It couldn't be used as timber either in the village or the wilderness. I
say that person is just like this. They've missed out on the pleasures
of the lay life, and haven't fulfilled the goal of the ascetic life."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "They've left behind the pleasures of the lay life,\
> and miss out on the goal of the ascetic life.\
> Ruining it, they throw it away,\
> and perish like a funeral firebrand.
>
> Many who wear a scrap of ocher cloth\
> are unrestrained and wicked.\
> Being wicked, they are reborn in hell\
> due to their bad deeds.
>
> It'd be better for the immoral and unrestrained\
> to eat an iron ball,\
> scorching, like a burning flame,\
> than to eat the nation's alms."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti92">

### [Iti 92]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Corner of the Cloak ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Saṅghāṭikaṇṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, suppose a mendicant were to hold the corner of my cloak and
follow behind me step by step. Yet they covet sensual pleasures; they're
infatuated, full of ill will and malicious intent. They are unmindful,
lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties. Then they are far from me, and I from them. Why
is that? Because that mendicant does not see the teaching. Not seeing
the teaching, they do not see me.

Suppose a mendicant were to live a hundred leagues away. Yet they do not
covet sensual pleasures; they're not infatuated, or full of ill will and
malicious intent. They have established mindfulness, situational
awareness and immersion, with unified mind and restrained faculties.
Then they are close to me, and I to them. Why is that? Because that
mendicant sees the teaching. Seeing the teaching, they see me."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One full of desire and distress\
> may follow close behind,\
> yet see how distant they are---\
> the stirred from the still,\
> the burning from the quenched,\
> the greedy from the greedless.
>
> An astute person who has understood\
> and directly known the teaching,\
> grows calm,\
> like a lake unstirred by the wind.
>
> See how close they are---\
> the still to the still,\
> the quenched to the quenched,\
> the greedless to the greedless."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti93">

### [Iti 93]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Fire ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Aggisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three fires. What three? The fires of
greed, hate, and delusion. These are the three fires."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The fire of greed burns a mortal,\
> lustful, infatuated by sensual pleasures;\
> while, fallen in the fire of hate,\
> a person kills living creatures;
>
> and, bewildered by the fire of delusion,\
> they miss the teaching of the noble ones.\
> Not recognizing these three fires,\
> people are caught up in substantial reality.
>
> They fill the ranks of hell,\
> of birth as an animal,\
> or of titans and ghosts,\
> not freed from Māra's bonds.
>
> But as to those committed day and night\
> to the teaching of the Buddha:\
> they extinguish the fire of greed,\
> always perceiving ugliness;
>
> while those supreme persons\
> extinguish the fire of hate with love;\
> and the fire of delusion with the wisdom\
> that leads to penetration.
>
> Having extinguished these fires, alert,\
> tireless all day and night,\
> they become fully extinguished,\
> completely transcending suffering.
>
> Seers of the noble truths, knowledge masters,\
> the astute, understanding rightly,\
> directly know the ending of rebirth,\
> they come not back to future lives."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti94">

### [Iti 94]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Examination ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Upaparikkhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, a mendicant should examine in any such a way that their
consciousness is neither scattered and diffused externally nor stuck
internally, and they are not anxious because of grasping. When this is
the case and they are no longer anxious, there is for them no coming to
be of the origin of suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the
future."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "For one who has given up seven chains,\
> a mendicant who has cut the cord,\
> transmigration through births is finished,\
> there'll be no more no more future lives for them."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti95">

### [Iti 95]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Provided With Pleasure ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāmūpapattisutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are these three ways of being provided with sensual
pleasures.[10](endnotes.xhtml_note-10){#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml_noteref-10
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} What three? Some sensual pleasures are
simply present; some are for those who love to imagine; and some are for
those who control what is imagined by others. These are the three ways
of being provided with sensual pleasures."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Sensual pleasures that are simply present,\
> gods who control what is imagined by others,\
> gods who love to imagine,\
> and others who indulge in sensual pleasures---\
> They go from this state to another,\
> but don't escape transmigration.
>
> Knowing this danger\
> in sensual indulgence, an astute person\
> would forsake all sensual pleasures,\
> both human and heavenly.
>
> Having cut the stream so hard to pass,\
> that's tied to pleasant seeming things,\
> they become fully extinguished,\
> completely transcending suffering.
>
> Seers of the noble truths, knowledge masters,\
> the astute, understanding rightly,\
> directly know the ending of rebirth,\
> they come not back to future lives."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti96">

### [Iti 96]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Yoked to Sensual Pleasures ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kāmayogasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, one yoked to both sensual pleasures and rebirth is a
returner, who comes back to this place. One unyoked from sensual
pleasures but still yoked to rebirth is a non-returner, who comes not
back to this place. One unyoked from both sensual pleasures and rebirth
is a perfected one, who has ended defilements."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Yoked to both sensual pleasures\
> and the desire to be reborn in a future life;\
> sentient beings continue to transmigrate,\
> with ongoing birth and death.
>
> Those who've given up sensual pleasures\
> without attaining the end of defilements,\
> and are still yoked to being reborn,\
> are said to be non-returners.
>
> Those who have cut off doubt,\
> and ended conceit and future lives,\
> they're the ones in this world `<j>`{=html}who've truly crossed over,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> having reached the ending of defilements."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti97">

### [Iti 97]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Good Morals ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kalyāṇasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant of good morals,
good practice, and good wisdom is called consummate, accomplished, a
supreme
person.[11](endnotes.xhtml_note-11){#iti-pancamavagga.xhtml_noteref-11
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

And how does a mendicant have good morals? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant
has good morals. Such is one of good morality.

And how does one have good practice? It's when a mendicant meditates
pursuing the development of the seven qualities that lead to awakening.
That's how a mendicant has good practice. Such is one of good morality
and good practice.

And how does one have good wisdom? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant has good wisdom;

Such is one of good morals, good practice, and good wisdom, who in this
teaching and training is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme
person."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Who does nothing wrong\
> by body, speech or mind,\
> is said to be one of good morals,\
> a conscientious mendicant.
>
> Who has well developed the seven\
> factors that lead to awakening\
> is said to be one good practice,\
> an unpretentious mendicant.
>
> Who understands for themselves\
> the end of suffering in this life\
> is said to be one good wisdom,\
> an undefiled mendicant.
>
> One accomplished in these three things,\
> untroubled, with doubts cut off,\
> unattached to anything in the world,\
> has given up everything, they say."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti98">

### [Iti 98]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Giving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Dānasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"There are, mendicants, these two gifts. A gift of things of the flesh
and a gift of the teaching. The better of these two gifts is the gift of
the teaching.

There are these two kinds of sharing. Sharing things of the flesh and
sharing the teaching. The better of these two kinds of sharing is
sharing the teaching.

There are these two kinds of support. Support in things of the flesh and
support in the teaching. The better of these two kinds of support is
support in the teaching."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "It is said to be the supreme, ultimate gift,\
> and the sharing praised by the Buddha;\
> what wise and sensible person, `<j>`{=html}confident in the best of
> fields, `</j>`{=html}\
> would not sow a such timely gift?
>
> For those who are diligent `<j>`{=html}in the dispensation of the Holy
> One, `</j>`{=html}\
> both those who speak and those who listen,\
> confident in the dispensation of the Holy One,\
> such a gift purifies the highest goal."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti99">

### [Iti 99]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Three Knowledges ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Tevijjasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I define a brahmin in terms of the teaching as one who is
master of the three knowledges, not the other who merely repeats what
they are told.

How so? It's when a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
This is the first knowledge they achieved. Ignorance was destroyed and
knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for
a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, a
mendicant sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior
and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is the second knowledge
they achieved. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was
destroyed and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent,
keen, and resolute.

Furthermore, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
third knowledge which they achieved. Ignorance was destroyed and
knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, as happens for
a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. That's how I define a
brahmin in terms of the teaching as one who is master of the three
knowledges, not the other who merely repeats what they are told."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "One who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the end of rebirth,\
> is a sage of perfect insight.
>
> Because of these three knowledges\
> a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges.\
> That's who I call a three-knowledge master,\
> and not the other `<j>`{=html}who repeats what they are told."
> `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>

[]{#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml}

# The Book of the Fours {#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_iti-catukkanipata .section-title .heading}

## The Chapter on the Holy Offering of the Teaching {#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_iti-brahmanadhammayagavagga .section-title .heading}

<article id="iti100">

### [Iti 100]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Brahmin's Offering of the Teaching ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Brāhmaṇadhammayāgasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"I, mendicants, am a brahmin, committed to charity, always open-handed,
bearing my final body, a healer, a surgeon. You are my true-born sons,
born from my mouth, born of the teaching, created by the teaching, heirs
in the teaching, not in things of the flesh.

There are these two gifts. A gift of things of the flesh and a gift of
the teaching. The better of these two gifts is the gift of the teaching.

There are these two kinds of sharing. Sharing things of the flesh and
sharing the teaching. The better of these two kinds of sharing is
sharing the teaching.

There are these two kinds of support. Support in things of the flesh and
support in the teaching. The better of these two kinds of support is
support in the teaching.

There are these two offerings. An offering of things of the flesh and an
offering of the teaching. The better of these two offerings is an
offering of the teaching."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The Realized One, `<j>`{=html}compassionate for all living creatures,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> unstintingly offers teaching.\
> Sentient beings revere him, `<j>`{=html}first among gods and humans,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> who has gone beyond rebirth."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti101">

### [Iti 101]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Easy to Find ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sulabhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, these four trifles are easy to find and are blameless. What
four? Rag-robes ... A lump of almsfood ... Lodgings at the root of a
tree ... Rancid urine as medicine ... These four trifles are easy to
find and are blameless. When a mendicant is content with trifles that
are easy to find, they have one of the factors of the ascetic life, I
say."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "When one is content with what's blameless,\
> trifling, and easy to find,\
> they don't get distressed\
> about lodgings, robes,\
> food, and drink,\
> and they're not obstructed anywhere.
>
> These qualities are said to be\
> integral to the ascetic life.\
> They're mastered by a mendicant,\
> content and diligent."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti102">

### [Iti 102]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Ending of Defilements ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Āsavakkhayasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows
and sees, not for one who does not know or see. For one who knows and
sees what? The ending of defilements is for one who knows and sees
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. The ending of the
defilements is for one who knows and sees this."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "As a trainee trains,\
> following the straight road,\
> first they know about ending;\
> enlightenment follows in the same lifetime.
>
> Then to one freed through enlightenment\
> the knowledge of ending arises,\
> the supreme knowledge of freedom,\
> with the ending of the fetters.
>
> This is not for the lazy,\
> the fools don't understand,\
> extinguishment is realized\
> with release from all
> ties."[12](endnotes.xhtml_note-12){#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_noteref-12
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti103">

### [Iti 103]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Ascetics and Brahmins ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. I don't deem
them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the
goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it
with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. I regard them as true ascetics
and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight." The Buddha
spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "There are those who don't understand suffering\
> and suffering's cause,\
> and where all suffering\
> cease with nothing left over.\
> And they do not know the path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> They lack the heart's release,\
> as well as the release by wisdom.\
> Unable to make an end,\
> they continue to be reborn and grow old.
>
> But there are those who understand suffering\
> and suffering's cause,\
> and where all suffering\
> cease with nothing left over.\
> And they understand the path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> They're endowed with the heart's release,\
> as well as the release by wisdom.\
> Able to make an end,\
> they don't continue to be reborn and grow old."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti104">

### [Iti 104]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplished in Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sīlasampannasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They advise
and instruct. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire, and can
rightly explain the true teaching. Even the sight of those mendicants is
very helpful, I
say.[13](endnotes.xhtml_note-13){#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_noteref-13
.noteref role="doc-noteref"} Even to hear them, approach them, pay
homage to them, recollect them, or go forth after them is very helpful,
I say. Why is that? For one who frequents and associates with such
mendicants, their incomplete spectrum of ethics is completed. Their
incomplete spectrum of immersion ... wisdom ... freedom ... knowledge
and vision of freedom is completed. Such mendicants are called
'teachers', 'leaders of the caravan', 'vice-discarders', 'dispellers of
darkness', 'bringers of light', 'luminaries', 'lamps', 'candlebearers',
'beacons', 'noble ones', and 'clear-eyed ones'."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "This is a reason for joy\
> for those who understand:\
> that is, those who are evolved,\
> the noble ones living righteously.
>
> They illuminate the true teaching,\
> beacons beaming light,\
> the attentive ones bringing light,\
> clear-eyed ones with vices discarded.
>
> Having heard their instruction,\
> the astute, understanding rightly,\
> directly know the ending of rebirth,\
> they come not back to future lives."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti105">

### [Iti 105]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The Arising of Craving ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Taṇhuppādasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, there are four things that give rise to craving in a
mendicant. What four? For the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or
rebirth in this or that state. These are the four things that give rise
to craving in a mendicant."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Craving is a person's partner\
> as they transmigrate on this long journey.\
> They go from this state to another,\
> but don't escape transmigration.
>
> Knowing this danger,\
> that craving is the cause of suffering---\
> rid of craving, free of grasping,\
> a mendicant would wander mindful."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti106">

### [Iti 106]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [With Divinity ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sabrahmakasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their
home is said to live with Divinity. A family where the children honor
their parents in their home is said to live with the old deities. A
family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to
live with the first tutors. A family where the children honor their
parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods.

'Divinity' is a term for your parents. 'Old deities' is a term for your
parents. 'First tutors' is a term for your parents. 'Worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods' is a term for your parents. Why is that? Parents
are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and
show them the world."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Parents are said to be 'Divinity'\
> and 'first tutors'.\
> They're worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods `<j>`{=html}from
> their children, `</j>`{=html}\
> for they love their offspring.
>
> Therefore an astute person\
> would revere them and honor them\
> with food and drink,\
> clothes and bedding,\
> anointing and bathing,\
> and by washing their feet.
>
> Because they look after\
> their parents like this,\
> they're praised in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti107">

### [Iti 107]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Very Helpful ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Bahukārasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, brahmins and householders are very helpful to you, as they
provide you with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies
for the sick. And you are very helpful to brahmins and householders, as
you teach them the Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And you reveal
a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. That is how this
spiritual path is lived supporting each other in order to cross over the
flood and make a complete end of suffering."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "The home-dweller and the homeless,\
> supporting each other,\
> find success in the true teaching,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> The homeless receive requisites\
> from the home-dwellers:\
> robes and lodgings\
> to shelter from harsh conditions.
>
> Relying on the Holy One,\
> home-loving layfolk\
> place faith in the perfected ones,\
> meditators of noble wisdom.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> the path that goes to a good place,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti108">

### [Iti 108]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Deceivers ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Kuhasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, those mendicants who are deceivers and flatterers, pompous
and fake, insolent and scattered: those mendicants are no followers of
mine. They've left this teaching and training, and they don't achieve
growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. But
those mendicants who are genuine, not flatterers, attentive, amenable,
and serene: those mendicants are followers of mine. They haven't left
this teaching and training, and they do achieve growth, improvement, or
maturity in this teaching and training."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Those who are deceivers and flatterers, `<j>`{=html}pompous and fake,
> `</j>`{=html}\
> insolent and scattered:\
> these don't grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha.
>
> But those who are genuine, not flatterers, attentive,\
> amenable, and serene:\
> these do grow in the teaching\
> that was taught by the perfected Buddha."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti109">

### [Iti 109]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [A River ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Nadīsotasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Suppose a person was being carried along by a river current that seemed
nice and pleasant. If a person with clear eyes saw them, they'd say:
'Mister, even though the river current carrying you along seems nice and
pleasant, downstream there is a lake with waves and whirlpools,
saltwater crocodiles and monsters. When you reach there it will result
in death or deadly pain.' Then, when they heard what was said, they'd
paddle against the stream using their hands and feet.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is the point.
'Stream' is a term for craving.

'Seeming nice and pleasant' is a term for the six interior sense fields.

'A downstream lake' is a term for the five lower fetters.

'Danger of waves' is a term for anger and distress.

'Whirlpool' is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

'Saltwater crocodiles and monsters' is a term for females.

'Against the stream' is a term for renunciation.

'Paddling with hands and feet' is a term for rousing energy.

'A person with clear eyes' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "In pain they'd give up sensual pleasures,\
> aspiring to the future sanctuary from the yoke.\
> With deep understanding and heart well freed,\
> they'd experience universal
> liberation.[14](endnotes.xhtml_note-14){#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_noteref-14
> .noteref role="doc-noteref"}\
> That knowledge master `<j>`{=html}who has completed the spiritual
> journey, `</j>`{=html}\
> and gone to the end of the world, `<j>`{=html}is called 'one who has
> gone beyond'." `</j>`{=html}

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti110">

### [Iti 110]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Walking ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Carasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel
thought while walking. They tolerate it and don't give it up, get rid of
it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. Such a mendicant is said to be 'not
keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
standing ... sitting ... or when lying down while awake. They tolerate
it and don't give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.
Such a mendicant is said to be 'not keen or prudent, always lazy, and
lacking energy' when lying down while awake.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
walking. They don't tolerate them, but give them up, get rid of them,
eliminate them, and obliterate them. Such a mendicant is said to be
'keen and prudent, always energetic and determined' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while
standing ... sitting ... or when lying down while awake. They don't
tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate
it. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and prudent, always energetic
and determined' when lying down while awake."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Whether walking or standing,\
> sitting or lying down,\
> one who thinks a bad thought\
> to do with the domestic life
>
> is practicing the wrong way,\
> lost among things that delude;\
> such a mendicant is incapable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening.
>
> But one who, whether standing or walking,\
> sitting or lying down,\
> has calmed their thoughts,\
> loving peace of mind;\
> such a mendicant is capable\
> of experiencing the highest awakening."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti111">

### [Iti 111]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [Accomplishment in Ethics ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Sampannasīlasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, keep the rules you've undertaken.

When you've done this, what more is there to do?

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking,
and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and
doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is
established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their
mind is immersed in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and
prudent, always energetic and determined' when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing
...[15](endnotes.xhtml_note-15){#iti-catukkanipata.xhtml_noteref-15
.noteref role="doc-noteref"}

sitting ...

or when lying down while awake. Such a mendicant is said to be 'keen and
prudent, always energetic and determined' when lying down while awake."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Carefully walking, carefully standing,\
> carefully sitting, carefully lying;\
> a mendicant carefully bends their limbs,\
> and carefully extends them.
>
> Above, below, all round,\
> as far as the earth extends;\
> they scrutinize the rise and fall\
> of phenomena such as the aggregates.
>
> Meditating diligently like this,\
> peaceful, not restless,\
> training in what leads to serenity of heart,\
> always staying mindful;\
> they call such a mendicant\
> 'always determined'."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

</article>
<article id="iti112">

### [Iti 112]{.sutta-heading .acronym} [The World ]{.sutta-heading .translated-title} [Lokasutta]{.sutta-heading .root-title} {.sutta-title .heading}

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

"Mendicants, the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
is detached from the world. The origin of the world has been understood
by the Realized One; and he has given up the origin of the world. The
cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
has realized the cessation of the world. The practice that leads to the
cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; and he
has developed the practice that leads to the cessation of the world.

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---whatever is seen,
heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind, all
that has been understood by the Realized One. That's why he's called the
'Realized One'.

From the night when the Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished---in the element
of extinguishment with no residue---everything he speaks, says, and
expresses is real, not otherwise. That's why he's called the 'Realized
One'.

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. Since this is so,
that's why he's called the 'Realized One'.

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---the Realized One is
the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of
power. That's why he's called the 'Realized One'."

The Buddha spoke this matter. On this it is said:

> "Directly knowing the whole world as it is,\
> and everything in it,\
> he is detached from the whole world,\
> disengaged from the whole world.
>
> That attentive one is the champion\
> who is released from all ties.\
> He has reached ultimate peace:\
> extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter.
>
> He is the Buddha, with defilements ended,\
> untroubled, with doubts cut off.\
> He has attained the end of all deeds,\
> freed with the ending of attachments.
>
> That Blessed One is the Buddha,\
> he is the supreme lion,\
> in all the world with its gods,\
> he turns the divine wheel.
>
> And so those gods and humans,\
> who have gone to the Buddha for refuge,\
> come together and revere him,\
> even the deities revere him:
>
> 'Tamed, he is the best of tamers,\
> peaceful, he is the seer among the peaceful,\
> liberated, he is the foremost of liberators,\
> crossed over, he is the most excellent of guides across.'
>
> And so they revere him,\
> great of heart and intrepid.\
> In the world with its gods,\
> he has no rival."

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I
heard.

The So it Was Said is finished.

</article>

[]{#colophon.xhtml}

<article epub:type="colophon" id="colophon">

# Colophon

## The Translator

[Bhikkhu Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} was born as Anthony Aidan Best
on [4/11/1966]{.dc:date} in Perth, Western Australia. He grew up in the
pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and Attadale alongside his sister Nicola,
who was the good child. His mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née
Pinder, said "he'll either be a priest or a poet", while his father,
Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to "never do anything for money". He
attended Aquinas College, a Catholic school, where he decided to become
an atheist. At the University of WA he studied philosophy, aiming to
learn what he wanted to do with his life. Finding that what he wanted to
do was play guitar, he dropped out. His main band was named Martha's
Vineyard, which achieved modest success in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in 2018, and the
early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were complete by 2021. All this work
is dedicated to the public domain and is entirely free of copyright
encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

## Creation Process

Translated from the Pali. The primary source was the Mahāsaṅgīti
edition, with reference to several English translations, especially
those of John Ireland.

## The Translation

This translation aims to make a clear, readable, and accurate rendering
of the Itivuttaka, preserving consistency with Sujato's renderings of
the main nikāyas.

## About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

## About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

## About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

</article>

[]{#imprint.xhtml}

:::::: {#imprint.xhtml_imprint .section .imprint}
`<cite property="dc:title">`{=html}So It Was Said`</cite>`{=html} is a
translation of the [Itivuttaka]{property="dc:title"} by [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"}.

::: license
[Creative Commons Zero
([CC0]{.license-abbreviation})](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode){rel="license"
target="_blank"}

To the extent possible under law, [Bhikkhu
Sujato]{property="dc:creator"} has waived all copyright and related or
neighboring rights to `<cite property="dct:title">`{=html}So It Was
Said`</cite>`{=html}.

This work is published from
[Australia]{about="https://suttacentral.net/licensing" content="AU"
datatype="dct:ISO3166" property="vcard:Country"}.

<aside class="license-statement">

This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.

</aside>
:::

::: {.text-metadata about="https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/master/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn"}
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Web publication date   2020
  This edition           2025-01-25 12:18:21
  Publication type       epub
  Edition                ed2
  Number of volumes      1
  Publication ISBN       978-1-76132-073-6
  Publication URL        <https://suttacentral.net/editions/iti/en/sujato>
  Source URL             <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/kn/iti>
  Publication number     scpub16
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: publisher
Published by [SuttaCentral]{.publisher property="dc:publisher"}

<address>
SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia\
</address>
:::
::::::
