![](Images/cover_dhamma_everywhere%20copy.jpg)

## DHAMMA EVERYWHERE: WELCOMING EACH MOMENT WITH AWARENESS+WISDOM {#Section0001.xhtml_dhammaeverywhere:welcomingeachmomentwithawarenesswisdom style="text-align: center;"}

**ASHIN TEJANIYA**

DHAMMA EVERYWHERE: WELCOMING EACH MOMENT WITH AWARENESS+WISDOM Copyright
© Ashin Tejaniya 2011 This is a gift of Dhamma and must not be sold. You
may make photocopies for your own use or to give away to friends. Kindly
ask for permission from Ashin Tejaniya first before doing any
translations on this book. Shwe Oo Min Dhamma Sukha Tawya\
Aung Myay Thar Yar Street\
Kon Tala Paung Village\
Mingaladon Township\
PO 11022 Yangon, Myanmar\
951--638--170, 951--720--591 For more Dhamma materials, please visit:
<www.sayadawutejaniya.org>

> ::: {style="text-align: center;"}
> ***Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammā-Sambuddhassa***\
> :::
>
> ::: {style="text-align: center;"}
> *[*Homage to Him, the Blessed One, the Worthy
> One,*]{style="font-style: normal;"}\
>*
> :::
>
> ::: {style="text-align: center;"}
> [*the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One*]{style="font-style: normal;"}\
> :::

#### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS {#Section0004.xhtml_acknowledgements}

My special gratitude goes to my teacher, the late Venerable Shwe Oo Min
Sayadaw Bhaddanta Kosalla Mahā Thera, who taught me Dhamma and the right
attitude for my spiritual development and meditation practice. I want to
express my appreciation to all yogis. Their questions and difficulties
have once again inspired many of the explanations in this book. I really
hope that this book will help yogis to better understand mindfulness
meditation and to deepen their practice.

Finally, I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to the
completion of this book.

Ashin Tejaniya

#### DEAR READER {#Section0005.xhtml_dearreader}

Ashin Tejaniya's style of teaching and emphasis has always been dynamic,
evolving with his own experiences and recognition of yogis' difficulties
with the practice. This book is an attempt to capture his teachings at
this point in time but Ashin Tejaniya keeps coming up with new and
better ways to explain things!

We have collected Ashin Tejaniya's teachings from several sources and
contexts to include a breadth of material that will hopefully resonate
with beginner and experienced yogis alike. Included are translations
from Burmese: The little blue book on the right attitude for meditation
and selections from Dhamma discussions and morning Dhamma reminders at
the Shwe Oo Min Dhamma Sukha Tawya Meditation Center. We have rounded
out the topics with transcriptions of morning Dhamma reminders given in
English.

Like the first two books, this book has been produced for yogis
practicing at the Shwe Oo Min Dhamma Sukha Tawya Meditation Center. As
such, some words and terms used here may not be used in the same way or
with the same meanings elsewhere (more in A Note on Words). May you find
the book to be a source of information and inspiration, from What is
Mindfulness Meditation? and Right Attitude 101 to excerpts of Dhamma
discussions in In a Nutshell and Dhamma in the Mornings. Please note
that this book is by no means meant to replace the personal guidance of
the teacher.

We have tried to translate and express Ashin Tejaniya's teachings as
accurately as possible. Please excuse any errors in translation and
details that may have gotten lost in the process. Kindly contact us with
suggestions for future publications.

Our deep gratitude goes to Sayadaw U Tejaniya for patiently lighting the
path of awareness+wisdom and teaching us the right attitude for
meditation. May all living beings benefit from the combined efforts of
those who have contributed to this process: Margaret Smith, Katherine
Rand, Chan Lai Fun, Hor Tuck Loon, Becky Chan, Karen Recktenwald, Bhante
Abhayaratana, Bhante Khemacara, Preethi Dissanayake, Sriya Tennakoon,
Sister Khema, Cheong Thoong Leong, Sister Mayatheri, Maxine Cheong, SSW,
Albert Lee, Susa Talan, Alexis Santos, Steve Armstrong, Nancy Zan, Yopi
Sutedjo, Hirok Ghosh, Sister Co Minh, Zaw Minn Oo, 1--2, Ma Thet, Walter
Köchli, the publishing teams, and anyone unintentionally left off here!

Laura Zan, Translator & Compiler

#### A NOTE ON WORDS {#Section0006.xhtml_anoteonwords}

We work within the limits of language and concepts to describe and give
suggestions for a process of clear seeing that is at times difficult to
pin down with words. As such, when reading this book, please don't
adhere tightly to dictionary definitions or rules of grammar.

You may notice a new combination word "awareness+wisdom" in the title
and in parts of the book. It is Ashin Tejaniya's way of underscoring the
need for more than mere awareness in vipassanā. Awareness alone is not
enough; wisdom must also be present with the awareness on this path of
learning and understanding.

Constructs like "the mind is knowing" (versus "the mind knows") are used
in instances where it seems more appropriate to describe something in
process. The following words are used interchangeably: watching, being
aware, observing, being mindful, and paying attention. Finally, "Dhamma"
with a big "D" refers to the teachings of the Buddha, the practice of
meditation while "dhamma" with a little "d" refers to natural phenomena,
natural law, or object.

Pāli and English words have been used in combination throughout the
book. Sometimes the English translation is only an approximate, short
description of the actual Pāli meanings, but the explanation should be
adequate for the practice of mindfulness meditation. Do refer to the
glossary of Pāli terms at the end of book and consult Buddhist
dictionaries and texts for more complete definitions. "Try to get a
„feel' for Pāli terms when you hear them; try to understand them in
context" is advice we will repeat here from Ashin Tejaniya's book
***Awareness Alone is not Enough***.

Finally, in order not to have to decide on the use of "she" or "he" in
describing yogis' experiences (as well as the use of "we" or "you" in
the explanations), we have given a fair chance to each of these
concepts.

### WHAT IS MINDFULNESS MEDITATION? {#Section0008.xhtml_whatismindfulnessmeditation}

Let's talk a little bit about meditation. At this center, we practice
Satipatthāna or mindfulness meditation on the four foundations of
mindfulness (body, feelings, mind, and dhamma). However, before we
begin, we need some clarity on what we are doing and why we are doing
it. It's important to begin this practice like we would begin any major
project, with an understanding of the ideas and underlying principles
behind what we will be doing. We need the right background information
and right ideas regarding the nature of mindfulness meditation so that
we can practice skillfully. We don't want to start blindly!

What is mindfulness meditation? What is our purpose in practicing? What
kind of mind and what kind of attitude should there be when we are
meditating? How do we practice?

To me, mindfulness meditation is basically working to transform the
mind. Meditation is about cultivating wholesome states of mind,
nurturing a Dhamma mind, and bringing out the good qualities in the
mind. Mindfulness meditation is not work done by the body or work done
by objects (what is happening, what is being observed, explained further
in the section What are objects?).

> *Objects do not meditate. It is the mind that meditates. That's why
> meditation is called "mind work" and that's why you need to know about
> the mind.*

#### How Do You Know That There Is A Mind? {#Section0008.xhtml_howdoyouknowthatthereisamind}

Do you know that you have a mind? How do you know that you have a mind?
You can see or observe the mind through its workings/functions e.g.
knowing, thinking, experiencing, feeling, wanting, focusing, etc. Now,
put your hands together and look at your clasped hands. You know that
your hands are touching, right? How do you know this touching sensation?
What is the mind doing that you are able to know this? You know because
the mind is aware and paying attention to it now.

Do you know that the mind is paying attention and aware? Would you know
that your hands were touching if your mind was thinking about something
else? No. So you can see that it is not merely because your hands are
touching that you know but because the mind is paying attention and
awareness is a quality that is a part of this attention that you know
they are touching.

Can you shift your attention from your palms to your feet? You can,
right? This shift in attention is actually the mind at work. It is the
mind paying attention. If you know that you are paying attention, then
you are aware of the mind. There is no need to go searching for the
mind, as everyone more or less knows it. Knowing, thinking, planning,
and intentions are all workings of the mind. It's just not as easy at
first to recognize the mind as it is other objects because of a lack of
understanding of what the mind is.

#### Persistence {#Section0008.xhtml_persistence}

What kind of effort do we need when we are meditating? Right now many
people know of only one type of effort, which is energetic, forcing
effort. However, it is wrong effort when it is motivated by defilements
like craving (lobha), aversion (dosa), or delusion (moha). This kind of
effort will only feed more defilements in the process.

How then, do we meditate? We use the wholesome (kusala) effort and the
right effort of patience and perseverance in our practice. Awareness
(sati) needs to be balanced. Confidence in oneself and faith (saddhā) in
the practice should be balanced. Effort or energy (viriya) should also
be balanced. These spiritual faculties, along with stability of mind
(samādhi) and wisdom (paññā), make up the five spiritual faculties
(indriya) working together in meditation.

> *Insights don't have an opportunity to arise when we are very intent
> on one object without exploring or investigating what is happening
> (dhamma-vicaya).*

We can't say we are practicing insight meditation (vipassanā) when we
are just focusing or paying attention because vipassanā is the practice
of learning about mind and body processes (nāma-rūpa).

#### Who Is Meditating? {#Section0008.xhtml_whoismeditating}

You are not meditating; it is the ideas operating in the background (in
the mind) that are meditating. If these underlying ideas are wrong, then
the rest of the meditation will be done in the wrong way. Only with the
right idea, right attitude, and right understanding in the meditating
mind (the mind that's aware or the observing mind) do you have right
practice.

The information in this book, Dhamma discussions, Dhamma discourses, and
reminders are all meant to give us right information. We then use this
information, what we have learned, heard, and know about right practice,
as well as our intelligence during the practice (a type of wisdom) in
order for wisdom to develop.

We need right view (sammā-ditthi) and right thinking. We also need
inquiry and dhamma investigation, which is the investigation of
phenomena and reflection on how we are observing or practicing, while we
are practicing. The emphasis is on the need for wisdom along with the
awareness (also referred to as "awareness+wisdom" in this book) so that
the wisdom acquired through direct experience has a chance to arise.

The meditating mind, the mind that's aware, or the observing mind needs
to be a Dhamma mind, a wholesome mind. We have right meditation only
when we practice with a wholesome mind. We can't say we are meditating
properly when we are practicing with craving, aversion, or delusion
operating in the meditating mind.

> *When we practice with wanting or expectations, we are meditating with
> greed. When we practice with dissatisfaction and discontent, we are
> meditating with aversion. When we practice without having a real
> understanding of what we are doing, we are meditating with delusion.*

A part of the work in meditation is to begin to recognize unwholesome
tendencies when they arise. We can't help having these motivations while
trying to meditate. We can recognize when there are wrong or unwholesome
tendencies and when there are right or wholesome tendencies and their
corresponding effects. This means learning what is wholesome and what is
unwholesome. To do this, we use the theoretical information we get, as
well as our intelligence and wisdom while practicing to recognize when
there are defilements in the mind. We also need to appreciate this
process of learning.

#### What Are Objects? {#Section0008.xhtml_whatareobjects}

We often use the word "objects". What is the meaning of an **object**?
An object is what we experience, what we observe, and something that is
known by the mind. There is always something happening so there is no
lack of things to observe. They are all happening (or "arising")
according to their nature. In mindfulness meditation, we are not
controlling our experiences. We observe when something happens or
arises, the mind's attention is attracted to it, and so we observe it.
The nature of an object is to be known, sensed or experienced by the
mind.

> *In any given moment, there are many, many objects arising at the six
> sense doors that the mind can possibly be aware of and know.*

How many sense doors are there? There are six sense doors! How we
observe the sense objects is the mind at work. While we need an
understanding of the object side, we also need to recognize that
meditation is not done by objects. Meditation is done by the mind.
That's why in order to practice well, It's important to understand the
mind, including how it observes, how it works, and its underlying
attitudes. What kind of mind are we meditating with?

When we are focused on an object, we can't see the workings of the mind.
When we look through the glasses we are wearing at what we want to see,
we may not realize that we have glasses on! Likewise, if there's too
much focusing on objects, we no longer see the mind, what It's doing, or
how It's operating. If we don't concentrate so much on an object, we may
at least realize that we are wearing glasses. That's how the mind works.

That's why I caution you not to focus if your goal is to get a complete
picture and to understand the nature of mind and objects. Do you
understand? When you practice, the difference between what you observe
and how you are observing (the act of observing) will become even
clearer. In other words, this knowledge of the object and the mind will
become clearer. You recognize for yourself, "Oh, this is object and this
is the mind" and that their natures are different. You'll see this as
you are practicing. I am explaining this to you now so that you have the
information to help you when you are meditating.

Think about this carefully: Are you practicing mindfulness meditation
when you sit and focus on an object? Is it mindfulness meditation when
you are just paying attention to something? No, that's just focusing on
an object. Or what if you are just being aware? What if the meditating
mind is full of unwholesome mental qualities?

Let's say you are knowing, watching, and being aware: What is object
(mind and/or body) and what is mind, or in other words, what is being
observed and what is doing the observing? Shouldn't you investigate
this? Can this kind of investigative quality arise in a yogi who is just
intent on observing objects? Can a yogi who's just contented with
peaceful mental states get insights into the nature of the mind and
body? No. The yogi will just cling to that peaceful state, working to
stay longer in that state. There's no possibility for wisdom to arise
then.

> *So, in mindfulness meditation, we don't need to cultivate or work on
> objects or what we observe. We can and will need to develop how we
> observe.*

We do this by first noticing or acknowledging how the mind is already
observing. Is it agitated or calm? Is there some kind of wisdom present?
(More on different kinds of wisdom: Sutamayā paññā, cintāmayā paññā, and
bhāvanāmayā paññā in section Awareness alone is not Enough). You don't
need to try to change how the mind is observing. You do want to take
note of how it is observing and the corresponding effects of observing
in that way.

Over time, you will notice different causes and effects. When you have
repeatedly observed and seen different scenarios, you will begin to
better understand the relationship of how the state of mind and the
thoughts in the mind affect the way you feel about the object or what
you are observing.

#### Start With Any Object {#Section0008.xhtml_startwithanyobject}

Start with an awareness of any object. As you maintain awareness, keep
checking the mind. What is the mind aware of? When it is aware, is the
mind at ease or not? Is it relaxed? What is the attitude in the mind?
Keep checking. Be mindful that you are not just intent on objects!

While being mindful in walking, keep checking the mind to see whether it
is impatient or relaxed. Is that hard to know? No! You just have to keep
checking the mind, right? Is it so hard to be aware of the mind? At this
point, It's fine to be aware of more apparent mental states and workings
of the mind. Don't go looking for anything subtle just yet. How is the
mind? Is it feeling at peace or is it tense? Is it tired? You can know,
can't you? Observe the mind. What is happening? Here are some things you
might want to know:

- With what kind of mind are you being aware?
- How does the mind feel when you are aware of this object?

Try to observe mind-object relationships like this. It is important to
have an awareness of these kinds of causal relationships and connections
in practice.

#### Use Any Object To Develop Awareness {#Section0008.xhtml_useanyobjecttodevelopawareness}

Which is better: Watching the breath or watching the abdomen? Neither is
better than the other. They're the same! You should not prefer one over
the other. If you do, you are attached to an object.

The object at the nostrils is an object. The object at the abdomen is an
object. Sound is an object. Heat is an object. In vipassanā, the eyes
are one sense door and the ears are another sense door. Can you become
aware with any object? Can you start with sounds? Do you have to go
looking for sounds? Aren't they always there? You can know that there is
sound. Take whatever object is available. There's no need to look for
very subtle objects.

> *Vipassanā uses any object to develop awareness (sati), stability of
> mind (samādhi), and wisdom (paññā).*

A yogi with awareness+wisdom will use any object to develop sati,
samādhi, and paññā instead of growing in craving, aversion, or delusion.
The mind will grow in strength as you practice with ease and consistent
awareness. Remember that the object is not important; the observing mind
with the right attitude is more important.

#### The Mind Has To Be Alert And Interested {#Section0008.xhtml_themindhastobealertandinterested}

Dhamma practice is mind work, which means the mind has to have
awareness. It also has to be alert and interested in studying itself.
But because of our habitual tendency to pay more attention to what is
happening out there, we very often forget to check ourselves. That is
why we have to keep asking and reminding ourselves in order to maintain
awareness.

Momentum comes from practicing moment-to-moment. We want the kind of
mindfulness that keeps going without a break so that we eventually have
a natural momentum of awareness. Using a simile, we don't want the type
of fire that burns in a flash. We want a long lasting fire from durable
materials like wood or coal.

#### What Is A Good Time For Meditation? {#Section0008.xhtml_whatisagoodtimeformeditation}

Many yogis have this idea that their meditation begins when they hear
the bell. That's not so! The bell is there only to remind you. The right
time to practice is from the time you wake up in the morning to the time
you go to bed at night. When you wake up in the morning, check yourself.
Is the mind clear? Does it feel refreshed? Is it still sleepy? You wake
up but you want to continue sleeping. Is that difficult to know? Can you
know all these? You just have to ask yourself.

You are practicing to know the mind and body. Let whatever happens,
happen; it is not important. The mind's work is to know and to
acknowledge, which can happen in any posture or activity. Sitting on the
cushion does not necessarily mean you are practicing. Some yogis sit and
fall asleep while others sit and daydream away! Is this considered
meditation?

#### Waiting And Watching With Intelligence {#Section0008.xhtml_waitingandwatchingwithintelligence}

> *In this practice, we don't focus, control, exert, restrict or
> interfere. These actions are motivated by defilements like craving,
> aversion, or delusion.*

We have very often used a lot of wrong effort to get what we wanted or
tended to exert a lot of energy to get rid of something. We've also done
things blindly when we weren't sure what to do.

With this practice, you just wait and watch with intelligence. What can
you know naturally while you are sitting? You are not focusing or
looking at any special object. You are aware and now you observe
yourself:

- Are you aware that you are seated?
- What is happening in your body?
- What can you know naturally?

Expanding abdomen, contracting abdomen, heat, sounds...

- Are you aware of your palms touching?
- Aren't your arms tired?

How much effort do you need to know seeing, hearing, heat, cold,
touching, or tiredness? Do you need to focus to know any of these? Is
that tiring or difficult? See how easy observing is? Would it be tiring
to practice like this the whole day?

Ask yourself if you are aware and then begin the sitting or walking
meditation. It is the nature of the mind to naturally take up the object
it wants and will know as much as it is able to know. Keep checking when
you are sitting, walking, eating, or doing daily activities. The mind
can know what it wants, can't it? This "knowing naturally" is easier on
you. Trying to find the object you want requires energy.

#### Awareness Alone Is Not Enough {#Section0008.xhtml_awarenessaloneisnotenough}

So far, we've talked about awareness and waiting and watching with
intelligence.

> *Remember that awareness alone is not enough! There has to be wisdom
> present in the awareness.*

Where is that wisdom going to come from? There are three kinds of
wisdom: Sutamayā paññā, cintāmayā paññā, and bhāvanāmayā paññā. Sutamayā
paññā is **information** you get from reading, from listening to Dhamma
discourses, or from discussions with teachers. Cintāmayā paññā is
**intelligence** or knowledge acquired through thinking, reasoning, or
intellectual analysis. Bhāvanāmayā paññā is **insight** or wisdom gained
through direct experience. In short, we refer to them as information,
intelligence, and insight. In this book, we may refer to any of these as
"wisdom," or be more specific at times by using the words information,
intelligence, or insight.

Are you able to work on a certain subject matter if you don't know
anything about it? You can perform only with right information. So how
do you get right practice? Before you begin to practice, you need to
have some accurate and complete information so that when you are
practicing, wisdom in the form of information and intelligence are
present with the awareness. You need right information and right
attitude as wisdom for right practice. The Buddha called it mindfulness
and clear comprehension (sati-sampajañña).

By having the right information on meditation, you won't run into
problems using the wrong information. This information comes from
listening to get Dhamma knowledge, asking for clarification, and having
Dhamma discussions. I will give you information, and as yogis, you use
this information and your own intelligence when you are practicing. You
apply these two kinds of wisdom (information and intelligence) to the
practice of meditation. Insight wisdom arises when the right kinds of
conditions come together.

#### Thinking While Practicing {#Section0008.xhtml_thinkingwhilepracticing}

So, should you think or not think while practicing? You should be
watchful of the kinds of thoughts that will increase craving, aversion,
or delusion. When people say there shouldn't be thinking, they are
referring to defilement-motivated thinking. Of course you can't help
thoughts that just arise naturally but you don't help these
defilement-motivated thoughts to grow even more.

> *You don't stop all sorts of thinking! You should think about the
> Dhamma you have heard, information you've read here, and reflect on
> the work you are doing and consider how you are practicing. This kind
> of thinking will help wisdom grow.*

This information I'm giving you now will be working in the mind when you
are practicing and you use the theory along with your own intelligence
to work skillfully with the situation at hand. Utilizing the good
qualities of the mind (i.e. sati, viriya, paññā) and applying
intelligence is the work of mindfulness meditation.

Question: There is the object and there is the watching or observing
mind. Which is more important?\
Answer: The watching or observing mind is more important.

You need to pay attention to the observing mind if you want to
understand the truth. Regularly check on how you are practicing. Can
wisdom arise in the presence of craving, aversion, or delusion in the
observing mind? What attitude is the mind practicing with? Check your
attitude regularly. Don't be fixated on experiences. They will arise
according to their nature and they only serve to keep the awareness.

A wise yogi uses the six sense objects to develop awareness, stability
of mind, and wisdom. For those who are not so mature, the same objects
will only increase craving, aversion, and delusion.

Question: Which object is better, the incoming / outgoing breath at the
nostrils or the rising / falling motion of the abdomen?\
Answer: It's neither! One object is not better than another. An object
is just an object. If you perceive one object to be better than another
object, you will naturally become attached to the preferred object.
Later, when you can't pay attention to that specific object, then you
may find that you are not able to practice.

Craving will surely arise when choosing one object over another.
Aversion comes in when you don't find the object of your choice.
Believing that an object is "good" is really delusion at work!

So, is it your responsibility to develop the object or the faculty of
awareness in meditation? Objects will always present themselves
according to their nature; your work is to develop awareness. You are
not trying to change anything that is happening but working to
strengthen and improve the mind that is not yet strong in awareness.
Right now, there's little stability of mind, wisdom is weak, effort
feeble and faith lacking. Meditation is the work of cultivating and
strengthening the spiritual faculties of sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā,
and pāññā.

#### Know Whatever Is Happening {#Section0008.xhtml_knowwhateverishappening}

Understanding that something is not beneficial is very different from
thinking or judging that something is "not good". If the mind labels
something as "good," there is craving already. With any object that
arises, delusion is already on the scene. Delusion conceals an object's
natural characteristics (but not the object itself) and labels it as
"good" or "bad". Lobha or dosa then do their work of grasping or
rejecting. So how are we going to meditate? Meditation is the
recognition of gross and subtle forms of craving, aversion, and
delusion, and all their relatives that are present in the mind while it
is observing objects.

> *In this meditation, we practice to know whatever is happening.
> Instead of trying to make the mind still, we just acknowledge and
> observe the agitation, with the right attitude.*

Because we want to learn about the nature of the mind and objects, we
don't try to calm the mind down or try to remove objects. We don't
interfere or control but observe, because we want to understand the mind
and objects in their natural state, as they are happening. This is right
view.

As such, we also don't try to remove aversion when it arises. We are not
trying to get rid of aversion. As soon as we try to push aversion away,
there is more aversion. Aversion is always negative, having the quality
of pushing something away. We are observing aversion because we want to
know its true nature. This is what it means to meditate.

#### Study Everything That Happens {#Section0008.xhtml_studyeverythingthathappens}

If our goal is to have understanding, we need to get to know the nature
of as many objects as possible, how the mind and body processes work,
and the cause and effect relationships.

> *Merely knowing one aspect of an experience will not lead to any
> insight. The data is still incomplete and wisdom is still weak.*

It is important to study everything that happens and to be able to know
all objects. So we work with any object that arises; there is no need to
create any experience or to keep our attention on one particular object.
We need to use our wisdom along with awareness to learn about whatever
is happening in that moment. Only then our view broadens, our horizon
expands, and wisdom develops. We need a lot of information (sometimes
referred to as "data") for this to happen.

Watch out for craving that can arise subtly in the form of attachment
for or aversion to objects. Take a step back and observe, using the
investigative mind with the right attitude working in the background.
Ask yourself these questions: What is happening? Is what is happening
good or bad? Is it really good or bad? Is it right or wrong? Why is it
happening? Because you want to understand what is happening, you observe
and investigate with intelligence. The inclination to know is already
there in the mind. The observing mind with the right attitude and
investigative faculties needs to be present. So you now understand a
little more about the difference between focusing versus waiting,
watching, and observing with wisdom.

#### Five Spiritual Faculties (Indriya) {#Section0008.xhtml_fivespiritualfacultiesindriya}

Awareness (sati), steadiness and stability of mind (samādhi), effort or
wisdom' energy (viriya), faith and confidence (saddhā), and wisdom
(paññā) are five spiritual faculties that work together in the process
of meditation. Mindfulness meditation is the work of cultivating or
growing these spiritual faculties to work in balance.

#### Sati {#Section0008.xhtml_sati}

**Sati means not to forget. Sati means to remember.** What don't you
forget? You don't forget what is right and wholesome. It also means not
forgetting the right attitude and right object. To be aware doesn't mean
we create awareness out of what was absent before. Sati is about not
forgetting---sati is not energetic focusing.

> *The right object for you is your experience of the mind and body.*

There is only the nature of mind and the nature of body. That's all
there is. If you don't forget, you have awareness. If you know what is
going on, you also have awareness. So what do you do to have awareness?
Most people think they have to bring awareness back to some object with
the idea, "Oh, my awareness is gone, I must have awareness again."
That's a tiring way to practice.

I will give you a simpler, more relaxed way: Remind yourself. When you
try to get awareness, you may be focusing on an object. The mind that is
already thinking wrong thoughts now tries to be aware of an object. That
requires focusing energy. When you remind yourself, the mind thinks
about the mind and body and awareness is automatically there. If you
don't believe me, just ask yourself, "What is happening in the mind
right now?" You'll notice something. What is happening in the mind right
now? Is it peaceful? Agitated? Upset? What is happening? You'll see that
you can tell what is happening in the mind, even if only roughly. You'll
notice that if you think about the mind, the awareness turns towards the
mind. That's what it means to be aware.

#### Turning The Mind Inward {#Section0008.xhtml_turningthemindinward}

The mind is used to being aware of external phenomena. We are always
paying attention to what is happening externally and especially through
the eye sense door.

Mindfulness meditation turns the mind inward. So how does the mind turn
inward? If you just think about turning the mind in to what is happening
at the six sense doors, the mind is already paying attention internally.
It is the nature of the mind to take as an object what it thinks about.
Doesn't the mind go directly to your hand if you think about what is
happening at your hand? If you ask, "What is happening on my head," the
mind is immediately at your head. How much focusing do you need for
that?

Another way to turn the mind inward is to notice that the mind is paying
attention to external objects. Then let the mind step back to think
about what is happening in the mind and body. The mind's attention will
be at the mind and body. The body is easier to notice at first because
It's more apparent but with practice, the mind will also become easy to
observe. I pay more attention to the working or observing mind.

#### Meditation Begins When You Wake Up {#Section0008.xhtml_meditationbeginswhenyouwakeup}

> *Meditation begins when you wake up, not only when you reach the
> Dhamma Hall or when you sit down!*

Just think about yourself from the moment you wake up. Reflect on how
you will live with awareness. If you think about yourself, you will have
awareness. What is the mind feeling? What is the mind thinking? Where is
the mind? What is it doing? Use the information you now have and what
you know about the nature of the mind. Ask these questions from the
moment you wake up. If you are able to do this, can't you practice
anywhere or anytime? I began my practice this way.

#### Samādhi {#Section0008.xhtml_samadhi}

**Samādhi means a steady, stable mind; samādhi does not mean focusing.**
Do we necessarily get concentration by concentrating? Do we get a calm
mind every time we focus our attention on an object? Many yogis suffer
from headaches and stiff necks because they have used too much energy
and wrong effort to focus on objects! It also gets tiring because of
exertion of forceful energy as a result of wanting something or pushing
something away.

> *Vipassanā samādhi comes from right view, right attitude and right
> thought which, together with continuity of awareness, gives the mind
> stability. This kind of samādhi is called sammā-samādhi.*

We can get flustered when we can't rationally think through difficulties
in life. Alternatively, we maintain our composure when we can think
about a situation intelligently. In the same way, a calm mind develops
when there is right view, right attitude, and right thought; samādhi
can't develop with wrong attitude, wrong view or wrong thought.

#### Two Kinds Of Samādhi {#Section0008.xhtml_twokindsofsamadhi}

There is samādhi that comes about from concentrating on and paying
attention to one object exclusively and samādhi borne from right view,
right attitude, and right thought. There are two corresponding practices
for these two kinds of samādhi: Samatha practice and vipassanā practice
(what we are practicing here through mindfulness meditation). In knowing
about the differences between these two kinds of meditation, you'll
begin to recognize what you are doing in your own practice.

In tranquility (samatha) meditation, the mind pays exclusive attention
to one object, becoming absorbed in it over time. Having concentrated on
it for a long time (in the right way), the yogi achieves peaceful mental
states. However, because of this very strong grasp on one object, other
mental faculties don't get used and the mind is no longer aware of other
objects it could have otherwise known. There is no investigation of
phenomena nor is there a broader awareness of mind and body processes,
thus blocking the opportunity for wisdom to arise.

The idea in vipassanā is to relate to and be aware of as many objects as
possible without trying to create any particular result or experience.
Because vipassanā is the process of understanding things as they are
with the goal of achieving wisdom, it needs an awareness of whatever
object or process happening in that moment. Awareness collects data and
when the picture is complete, wisdom arises. This openness allows us to
see cause and effect and processes from different angles, giving wisdom
a chance to grow.

In vipassanā, instead of paying attention to one object, we pay
attention to the mind, specifically the observing, meditating mind. We
check the mind to see if there is wisdom present or if there are
defilements present in the mind.

> *We are interested in whether the meditating mind is operating with
> craving, aversion, delusion, or any of their relatives because
> insights can't arise in the presence of these defilements.*

So while meditating, It's very important to have wisdom in the
meditating mind.

#### Wisdom Samādhi Begins With Wisdom {#Section0008.xhtml_wisdomsamadhibeginswithwisdom}

Consider an example of two yogis: One yogi is bothered by sounds while
another yogi considers them as objects or natural phenomena. Which yogi
will have samādhi? The yogi with aversion to sounds will become even
more agitated whenever she hears sounds, with aversion increasing. On
the other hand, the yogi who neither likes nor dislikes these sounds
will remain calm and peaceful.

In vipassanā, the mind is learning how to not become attached to or have
aversion for any object. Wisdom samādhi begins with wisdom and invests
in wisdom. Because there is right view, right attitude, and right
thinking, the mind does not react with craving or aversion. There is no
attraction to or aversion for an object. The mind is calm, peaceful, and
still. The mind also feels light, alert, and fresh. This kind of samādhi
is inherent in wisdom and gives opportunities for more wisdom to arise.

#### Viriya {#Section0008.xhtml_viriya}

How do you understand viriya? **Viriya is the spiritual faculty of
patience and perseverance.** I understand viriya as persistence, not
exertion or force! Please don't wear out your mind or body by striving
forcefully when you meditate. Understanding can't develop when your mind
or body is tired.

Can you learn something thoroughly if you start and stop the process
many times? You will miss the storyline in a TV series if you catch a
few episodes and miss a few episodes. Similarly, only if awareness is
continuous, where you see the beginning, middle and end, will you then
understand the true nature of nāma-rūpa. That comes about through
consistent practice, from moment-to- moment.

Be cool and calm about it. Be interested. There should be consistent
effort but not exertion. Instead of using our energy to focus, we use
our intelligence and wisdom, by waiting and watching. If wisdom is
present, right effort is already there. For mindfulness meditation, we
accept, examine, and study whatever is happening as it is. We don't
interfere with what is happening. We don't make something unwanted to
disappear or stop, nor do we need to try to create preferred
experiences. The mind is doing its own work through recognizing, being
aware, knowing, thinking about the practice, and being interested, for
example. We're just seeing and acknowledging what is happening.

> *What is happening? Why is it happening? If there's no need for what
> is happening to go away, or what is not happening to appear, what sort
> of energy do you need to use?*

It's all already here, as it is! You just need to have your wisdom eye
open. Just recognize what is happening. If you are not looking for
anything specific but just sitting there with your eyes open, seeing
still happens. Do you need to make an effort to see or hear? Are you
still aware without having to focus on something? Mindfulness meditation
is that restful and gentle.

#### Practice In A Relaxed Way, But Don't Stop Practicing {#Section0008.xhtml_practiceinarelaxedwaybutdontstoppracticing}

What kind of effort do we use in our daily lives? We have automatically
used some kind of force primarily motivated by craving, aversion, or
delusion. It has become a habit. Viriya with wisdom, however, knows that
mindfulness practice is beneficial, so we persevere and we know our
motivation for practicing. We are running a marathon. Would a seasoned
runner use up all his energy from the very beginning? No! He runs at a
steady pace, picking up momentum as he goes through each mile. We want
this type of dhamma momentum that arises naturally in our practice. It
is not a forcefully created momentum.

Practice in a relaxed way, but don't stop practicing. At this center, we
meditate the whole day, from the moment we wake up to the moment we go
to sleep. If we put in a lot of energy or effort, can we meditate like
this the whole day? We certainly can't! We'll burn out and probably get
depressed. Faith in the practice will go down. That is why we don't
exert force; we just use persistence and we don't give up. We keep
applying ourselves as much as we can, but we don't slip.

Remember that this is not a 100-meter dash. We need to use wisdom effort
and energy, not craving effort. That is why we do what we can, steadily,
but we don't give up!

Question: When do you start practicing?\
Answer: From the moment you wake up to the time you fall asleep.

Is this work difficult or exhausting? No. Just don't forget. Keep
checking yourself and how much effort you are putting in. You need to
recognize these things for yourself.

#### Saddhā {#Section0008.xhtml_saddha}

**Saddhā is the spiritual faculty of faith and confidence.** You need to
have confidence in your practice and you need to have faith in what you
are doing. You need trust in the practice and trust in yourself. Be
interested in the practice and how you are practicing. More importantly,
faith in what you are doing will grow when you comprehend and see the
benefits of your work.

Confidence grows through meditation. When you practice, do you find
peace or stress? You will never be stressed when you practice
skillfully, with wholesomeness. You may get tired or stressed when you
aren't skillful yet and practice the wrong way. Once you learn how to
practice with Dhamma:

- Both the mind and body are at peace;
- You will be free from grief;
- Vipassanā wisdom will arise;
- Path knowledge (magga-ñāṇa) and fruition knowledge (phala ñāṇa) will
  arise; and
- The mind inclines towards Nibbāna.

That's what the Buddha stated in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta. Right now you
are learning how to practice properly. You begin with faith in yourself
and the practice. Confidence grows through right attitude and right
practice. With new insights, you will naturally feel faith in the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.

Do you work to get the truth or work so that you know how to practice
properly? Don't think about the getting part yet.

> *Instead of expecting results or thinking about end-goals, take
> interest in what you are currently doing and how you are approaching
> meditation.*

Have faith in your work and learn how you can become more skillful.
Trust yourself. How have you benefitted from practicing?

Intelligence and wisdom are necessary here. The intelligence needed for
right effort has to come before there can be any vipassanā wisdom, magga
wisdom, and phala wisdom. Can insight wisdom surface before any right
effort is made? First learn how to make this kind of right effort.

Between the mind and body, which one is putting in effort? It is the
mind putting in effort. Can you become skilled in the practice if you
don't know:

- The mind;
- What the mind is thinking;
- How much effort the mind is exerting;
- What kind of thoughts are present;
- What kind of attitudes are present; or
- The nature of the mind?

#### Take Interest In Your Work {#Section0008.xhtml_takeinterestinyourwork}

Take interest in the work you are doing. Many yogis encounter good and
bad experiences in their practice. Sometimes they have good meditation
and sometimes they don't feel satisfied with their practice. When I ask
them why, they don't know! Do you know why they can't tell me? It is
because they don't study or take interest in the work they are doing.
They don't know their minds, what they are doing, or why they are doing
it!

When you see the connection between what the mind does and what happens,
then you will begin to understand the nature of cause and effect. With
that, your confidence in the practice will grow even more.

#### Paññā {#Section0008.xhtml_panna}

**Paññā is wisdom. It is very important to have the right view when
practicing.** It's only when some kind of wisdom is present that
defilements are not able to sneak into the mind. So at the very least,
the wisdom that must be present in the mind is information (sutamayā
paññā). This is information you are getting from reading this book,
hearing the Dhamma and having Dhamma discussions. The other kind of
wisdom that must be present in the mind is curiosity and interest, a
wholehearted desire to really understand. So when you are being aware,
don't be blindly aware! Be intelligently aware. Applying your own
intelligence is a part of cintāmayā paññā.

Can a company manager run a business successfully without an overall
understanding of how the different areas of his business are connected?
He'll make all the wrong decisions using incomplete information. In the
same way, we need complete information for wisdom to develop and for
wisdom to make decisions. That's why for mindfulness meditation, the
mind needs to be willing to relate to any and all objects. The picture
is incomplete if we see only a portion of a whole process.

#### Right Attitude {#Section0008.xhtml_rightattitude}

The objects you are going to observe are the mind and body and the
nature of the mind and body. The nature of feelings in the mind, the
nature of the mind, the workings of the mind, the patterns of the mind,
and the characteristics of the mind are all there. What attitude do you
assume when you observe these feelings, the mind and/or body as objects?

It is sammā-ditthi if you observe these objects of the mind and body as
nature instead of as "me" or "mine". When you observe yourself, you see
the body and you see the mind. What is happening in the body? Do the
sensations of heat, cold, hardness, softness, or itchiness happen to you
alone? No. Everyone experiences them. Feelings, happiness, grief,
comfort, and mental distress are universal and happening in the mind.
How can you view them as yours when these things are experienced
universally? They are dhamma nature, natural principles, and objects.
Take them as nature; they are not unique to you.

Take heat as heat, not that you feel hot. Everyone feels heat and cold
and everyone experiences feelings. It is very important to have this
right attitude. You have right practice only when you have this right
view and right attitude.

> *Have You Ever Been Angry? When you are angry, and you think, "I am
> getting angry," what will happen?\
> The anger grows.*

Anger grows when you take possession of the anger with, "This is my
anger." When people are sad and they say, "I'm depressed, I'm feeling
down," then they really get depressed. Why is that? It's because their
attitude and ideas have assumed the sadness as their sadness.

If you consider sadness as just one aspect of the nature of mind, then
you'd feel much better. It's the mind that is sad, not my mind that's
sad. It's not, "I want, I'm not satisfied." It's the mind that is angry
or wanting. It's harder for defilements to grow stronger in the presence
of this right view in the mind. That is why you need to first assume the
right view. Awareness with the right view is called sammā-sati. You need
to begin your practice with this kind of information and knowledge.

#### The Mind Is An Aspect Of Nature {#Section0008.xhtml_themindisanaspectofnature}

The mind is an aspect of nature, not I, not self, no person. The mind is
a natural phenomenon. Only when you have this right idea then can you
truly be aware. You are practicing awareness to find out about this
nature. While you may not understand or realize the right view at first,
you can relate to everything that happens with this right view. You can
also think through the information you now have.

Why are you practicing awareness? You want to know the truth, the
reality of things; that is why you maintain awareness. Do not forget
this purpose.

#### Pain And Discomfort {#Section0008.xhtml_painanddiscomfort}

What do you do when you sit and feel pain, aches, or tiredness? How do
you observe the pain? If you observe the pain directly, it gets worse!
Why? Does anyone like pain? What happens in the mind as soon as there is
pain? There is aversion! That's why when there is pain, discontinue
observing the pain itself. Don't look at the sensations just yet when
you encounter itchiness, aches, pins and needles, heat, pain, or other
discomfort. These sensations can become unbearable if you continue to
observe them with the wrong attitude.

What should you do first? You need to first assume the right attitude:
Acknowledge the pain as a natural phenomenon, as just nature. Only with
this right attitude can you then see how you are feeling. What is the
nature of the feeling? What is the attitude at this time? When there is
aversion, examine the views within your thoughts. Can these thoughts
have right view? There is never right view when there is aversion; there
can only be unwholesome views.

It is good if you can see and learn about thoughts, feelings, and body
sensations together. How are they related? How are the mind and body
related? How are the causes and effects related? Your practice is
learning about these connections. Just watch and observe. You don't need
to make objects disappear and it also doesn't matter whether they
disappear or not. Why are you observing? You are observing because you
want to know and you want to understand. Observe as much as you can.

#### Sitting, Walking, And Daily Activities In Brief {#Section0008.xhtml_sittingwalkinganddailyactivitiesinbrief}

Can you change your position when you are meditating? You can move when
a certain posture becomes unbearable. If you need to adjust your
posture, do so. If It's not necessary, then don't move. What is an
appropriate time to adjust your posture? I have mentioned before that
meditation is developing and cultivating wholesome mental qualities. If
unwholesome mental qualities are growing and proliferating because you
are forcing yourself to sit still, then you can shift to make yourself
more comfortable. Determine what is appropriate based on your own
observations.

What do you observe in walking meditation? Start walking, and then ask
the mind what it knows. Just ask the mind: What does it know? Or what is
it aware of now? You can be aware of walking, sounds, or the movement of
your body. How is the mind while walking? If you are too focused on
being aware of walking, then you can get tense. How is the mind while
sitting or while eating? It's the same when you are in your own room, or
in the washroom. Ask yourself whether there is awareness. Only when
there is awareness, then sit, walk, go, eat, or do whatever you need to
do in daily activities.

A yogi's work is to:

- Have the right view, right attitude, and right thought, and
- Be intelligently aware, moment-to-moment.

#### Thoughts {#Section0008.xhtml_thoughts}

When you look at your thoughts, don't get swept away by the story. It is
enough if you are aware that thoughts are happening. I don't advise
beginning yogis to look at thoughts for too long or too much as it is
possible to get carried away when thoughts can't be seen as objects just
yet. Just acknowledge whenever thoughts happen, check the bodily
sensations, and alternate between the mind and the body.

> *Don't let the mind be idle for long periods during the day---keep it
> working! Be aware and remind yourself. Do that the whole time.*

#### Why Do We Practice The Whole Time? {#Section0008.xhtml_whydowepracticethewholetime}

Why are we asked to practice the whole time? It is because the mind is
collecting data through moment-to-moment awareness. When the data is
complete, understanding will arise. It is only when we practice
consistently and continuously in the right way will momentum build and
wisdom grow. You come to this center to practice as well as to learn how
to be skillful so you may take this meditation home with you.

### DHAMMA INVESTIGATION IN PRACTICE {#Section0009.xhtml_dhammainvestigationinpractice}

Ashin Tejaniya often refers to dhamma investigation or investigation of
phenomena (dhamma-vicaya) in his discussions. Dhamma-vicaya is the
second factor out of the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhaṅgas) and
is a kind of wisdom (cintāmayā paññā) that we use while practicing. Of
the seven factors, the first three factors (sati, dhamma-vicaya, and
viriya) are causes, factors that we can "input" or work on. The last
four factors are effects: pīti, passaddhi, samādhi, and upekkhā. We
can't create or make them happen. The following excerpt of a Dhamma
discussion illustrates Ashin Tejaniya's dhamma-vicaya in practice.

#### The Pendulum {#Section0009.xhtml_thependulum}

I was sitting in meditation and listening to Sayadawgyi (the late Shwe
Oo Min Sayadaw) giving a Dhamma discourse nearby. Suddenly, I saw this
very calm mind change in intensity. The mind that had been quite calm
before was now agitated. How did this happen? How did this anger come
about suddenly when the mind was so peaceful just moments ago?

The mind was now interested in knowing, so it backed up a bit and began
to ask questions. What is happening inside? This interest to know and
right thinking (sammā-saṅkappa) changed the path of the mind from anger
towards Dhamma. Without this right thinking, the mind would have
continued along the path of anger and aversion, still believing anger
was an appropriate response for the situation.

Did I cut off the anger through other means? No. The mind was interested
to know the truth and because of that, it just lightly and gently
watched the anger running its own course. The anger was happening on its
own.

What was happening in the mind? It was listening to sounds from two
different sides. There was Sayadawgyi's voice on one side and people
talking on the other side. I was aware of the different objects and the
mind going back and forth between the two. The mind wasn't focused only
on one thing; it knew a lot of things simultaneously and saw where the
attention was going as well.

I then saw this aversion! On the one side, I wanted to hear Sayadawgyi
but couldn't hear him well. I also saw the mind talking about the
situation and looking for trouble: "How can these people come and talk
around here when they've come here for the Dhamma?" Feelings came up as
much as this mind continued to talk.

The observing mind saw everything that was going on in the mind. Can you
see how expansive the field of view was at this point? After it saw the
mind going back and forth between these two sides a couple of times, it
saw the dissatisfaction. It was because the mind couldn't get what it
wanted, which was to hear Sayadawgyi's discourse. There was this
realization at that moment. And in that moment, the mind did not favor
one object or another but just remained in the middle. It saw the
suffering and just died down. I could just take sound as sound.

What did I realize at that moment? The mind had taken one kind of sound,
the sounds of Sayadawgyi's discourse as good, favorable sounds, whereas
the sounds of other people talking as bad, unwanted sounds!

> *I realized then that if there is greediness for something 30 degrees
> to one side of a pendulum, there will be just as much of a 30 degree
> swing toward dissatisfaction to the other side of the pendulum if it
> can't get that something.*

No one can block this from happening. So what happens if It's 45
degrees? What about 90 degrees? What if It's 180 degrees? I had realized
previously that even before anger arose that the mind would start
talking if it liked something. But because of this previous realization
and clear understanding, the mind was already reminding itself in this
situation.

#### Interest And Inquiry {#Section0009.xhtml_interestandinquiry}

That's how you need to meditate, with interest and inquiry every time
defilements arise. When you are ready, the lesson will come and you will
understand fully. What you want is this understanding, and development
of ñāṇa.

When I had really good, continuous awareness, I would be fully aware of
the object. I used to watch feelings until they calmed or died down. Of
course, the mind would calm down eventually. Why? The mind can
effectively calm down if it looks directly at something without being
able to think about anything else. But no wisdom or understanding arose.

#### Seven Factors Of Enlightenment {#Section0009.xhtml_sevenfactorsofenlightenment}

What we need here is dhamma-vicaya, one of the causes in the seven
factors of enlightenment (bojjhaṅgas). The seven factors of
enlightenment are sati, dhamma-vicaya, viriya, pīti, passaddhi, samādhi,
and upekkhā. The first three of the seven factors are causes and the
latter four are effects. We don't need to do anything to the effects of
pīti, passaddhi, samādhi, and upekkhā. We can't create them nor make
them happen.

What we need to cultivate are the causes: Sati, dhamma-vicaya, and
viriya. These are what we can work on.

> *Out of these three, yogis often pay attention to sati and viriya,
> forgetting dhamma-vicaya. Dhamma-vicaya is investigating phenomena,
> investigating what is happening, why it is happening, or how we are
> practicing by using the information we have, our intelligence, and
> wisdom.*

Dhamma-vicaya is a type of wisdom that falls under cintāmayā paññā. This
is needed here. We have to investigate with the desire to learn, to
know, and to understand.

#### The Role Of Awareness {#Section0009.xhtml_theroleofawareness}

The role of awareness is just gathering data. In the incident, there was
a wish to know. Awareness played the role of knowing everything that was
happening. It knew the mind going back and forth, the feelings, and what
was happening.

The answer will come when the data set is complete. It can't arise when
there is still some missing data. However, you do raise the level of
interest and curiosity in the mind by posing some questions. The
solution will eventually come to you when you have enough data for the
problem at hand. When mindfulness is not there in full, it only knows
gross-level objects. Right now you may have awareness and stability of
mind but you also need to go from grosser, superficial levels, to more
subtle levels. That is what it means for conditions to be complete.

Sharp awareness can see the inner workings of the mind. The causes that
are present can't be seen when there is only partial awareness. You may
see that there is no anger or greed present, but with greater awareness,
you'll notice that delusion is always present. Yogis sometimes tell me
that there is no greed or aversion present in the mind but that is a
very surface-level observation. They haven't really seen what is
underneath. A strong awareness and a steady mind are needed in order to
see more subtle levels. That's what I mean when I say you need to be
able to keep the steady mind in check for longer periods. If you can
maintain that steadiness (which requires a presence of wisdom) and you
ask a question, the answer will come.

#### Don't Let Anger Grow {#Section0009.xhtml_dontletangergrow}

You too can use different techniques as needed for the situation you are
in. Suppose you are at work and there's just too much work going on.
What will you do? I would in the past just use awareness. Because there
was already samādhi available from practice, the mind was able to use
that. I had a lot of work to do at the market and it was tough to
investigate, so I just cleared out the defilement using everything I had
learned (samatha or vipassanā). I didn't want anger to come up. When I
had a lot of work to do, I didn't think about anything else but just
watched the anger gently but continuously. It just went down. There was
no thinking involved. If I were to think while there was anger, the mind
would only think about anger-related things. I didn't think about
anything anymore at that moment but just watched this anger for a few
minutes and it went down.

Does the anger go to zero? No. You are not free yet at that moment. It's
still in there. But you will only see as deeply as the strength of sati
and samādhi present. If the defilement is still there, it'll just come
right back up. But of course It's better to handle the defilement while
It's still young.

> *When the fire is small, you can just throw some water on it. What
> happens if it has taken half the house? The water is gone, your energy
> is gone, and so is half the house! You'll to have to put in something
> more. That's why I wouldn't even give these defilements a chance
> anymore. I wouldn't allow them to come out.*

The Buddha said, "Don't give defilements a chance to arise." So what are
you not giving a chance to? Present defilements? Future defilements?
Past defilements? Defilements in the present are already happening. What
defilements can you overcome? If you recognize that there is defilement
present, you have not reached the stage of overcoming the defilement
yet. If the defilement is happening, It's already late. You are only at
the point of investigation. In reality, if you begin to understand,
wisdom will overcome it and close it down. That wisdom won't even give
it a chance to arise. That's how you overcome it. How does someone
overcome it by not letting it in? Do defilements have a chance to arise
if there is sati, samādhi, and paññā, and paññā is strong?

What if awareness is strong and there's a calm, stable mind, but wisdom
is weak? Anger will definitely come up. Some people with sati and
samādhi can sometimes have really strong tempers. Let's say someone has
really strong concentration. Samādhi alone (without wisdom) can amplify
a situation. Defilements also exaggerate situations. Combine the two and
you've squared it---what an explosion!

You'll begin to look for a way out only when you can't stand it anymore.
Someone who lives in the shade will not be able to stand it when it
becomes hot around him. So this person will make sure something like
that won't happen again in the future. He won't let the anger out
although the anger might want to come out.

#### Moha Is Darkness {#Section0009.xhtml_mohaisdarkness}

If you have just a little awareness, how much will you benefit? Do you
see how much more the mind is at ease? It's because you don't know just
how much is happening that you don't know how much lighter it could be.
There are always subtle defilements underneath. Delusion (moha) is
always there. Delusion is there whenever wisdom is not present. It is
only in those brief moments when wisdom is present that delusion is not
present. How many times does "I" not happen? Even if you see that for
just a brief moment... then delusion comes in to cover it up
immediately.

> *Moha is darkness.*

You have this tiny thief's flashlight. When you turn it on, of course
it'll light up and you can see. You can only see this small part in
front of you but you are probably just satisfied with that. Think about
it. You think, "Oh, I know a lot now." What about all that you haven't
seen? It's vast. You only know what you have seen but you don't know
what you don't know.

#### Stir Things Up A Little {#Section0009.xhtml_stirthingsupalittle}

If you are able to observe this little wisdom as it is happening, then
this wisdom will show the way. You don't realize what you don't yet
know. You only understand this little portion. That is why you can't
just be satisfied and stop there. It's not enough when you understand
something. You don't know the nature of delusion. When do you understand
the nature of delusion? You will understand when there's wisdom.
Delusion steps down for a brief while when wisdom arises. Then you'll
see just how much delusion is present. That's why I don't just ask about
objects. I ask you what you know and what is happening in the observing
mind.

> *You have to stir things up a little to help wisdom arise. What is
> happening? What about the observing mind? Ask every so often.*

That's why awareness and some questioning go hand-in-hand. There has to
be this inquisitive thoughtfulness along with the awareness. As the mind
changes, there's this urge to know and understand what is happening.
Only then the mind will be alert all the time. If the mind has a little
energy, it'll be aware, aware, aware... but let's say it gets cloudy
outside, then you become drowsy! When the mind calms down, you may
become drowsy.

In reality, when the mind becomes calm, It's prime time for you to use
your prior knowledge and information. You previously couldn't use too
much of this when the mind was agitated because things would have just
gotten jumbled up. You need to be putting these skills to use as
awareness strengthens and there's stability in the mind.

### RECAP: QUESTIONS FROM "WHAT IS MINDFULNESS MEDITATION?" {#Section0010.xhtml_recap:questionsfromwhatismindfulnessmeditation}

- With what kind of mind are you being aware?
- How does the mind feel when you are aware of this object? -Are you
  aware that you are sitting? Walking? Standing? Doing daily activities?
  What can you know naturally while you are doing these things?
- Where is the mind? What is it doing? What is it feeling? What is it
  thinking?
- What is happening? Why is it happening? If there's no need for what is
  happening to go away, or what is not happening to appear, - What sort
  of energy do you need to use?
- Do you need to make an effort to see or hear? Are you still aware
  without having to focus on something?
- There is the object and there is the watching mind. Which is more
  important?
- Which object is better: The incoming or outgoing breath at the
  nostrils or the rising and falling motion of the abdomen?
- What is happening in the body? What do you know? What can you know
  naturally?
- What is happening in the mind right now? Is it peaceful? Agitated?
  Upset? What is happening?
- When do you begin your practice during the day?
- What is the mind thinking? How much effort is the mind exerting? What
  kinds of attitudes are present?
- How are you meditating? Are you practicing the right way? How do you
  continue with the practice?

### RIGHT ATTITUDE 101 {#Section0011.xhtml_rightattitude101}

#### What Is The Right Attitude For Meditation? {#Section0011.xhtml_whatistherightattitudeformeditation}

Please check your attitude before you begin sitting meditation. What
kind of underlying ideas or attitudes are you meditating with? Do you
only want a peaceful mental state or do you want to learn about and
understand what is happening? The mind can't be cool and calm when you
want certain experiences other than what is happening in this present
moment.

> *The mind is already calm with samādhi when it isn't following after
> or looking for specific experiences.*

There is no need to go around trying to force the mind to know something
because it is already knowing. It is the nature of the mind to know
objects that are happening. Check your own mind. There is no need to
create anything. You observe objects and experiences that are happening
through their own dhamma nature. You just wait and watch with
intelligence.

No experience is a disturbance or a distraction as all experiences are
dhamma nature. What happens in the body is dhamma nature and what
happens in the mind is dhamma nature. Nothing belongs to me or you.
Feeling hot is just feeling hot and dhamma nature. We feel hotter only
when we take ownership of the heat as ours and develop an aversion to
it.

Everything is happening because of cause and effect. Our work is to...

- Have the right attitude,
- Maintain awareness,
- Use intelligence, and
- Be interested.

With Right View and Right Understanding, awareness becomes continuous
and has the quality of heedfulness and of not forgetting the right
object (appamāda). It is sammā-sati when wisdom is inherent in the
awareness.

#### How Are We Observing? {#Section0011.xhtml_howareweobserving}

There's no need to go around trying to find the object of choice. In
this meditation, we pay attention to the working, meditating mind and to
cultivating wholesome mental qualities. As such, we can use any object
to cultivate awareness, develop samādhi, and gain insight into the
nature of phenomena instead of generating more craving, aversion, or
delusion through wrong views and wrong underlying ideas.

Because we can use any object to cultivate awareness, we can start with
any object.

> *Please don't make the mistake of thinking that there is a better
> object out there than what you are currently experiencing.*

No experience out there is better than the present experience. What is
important is that the mind is aware and knowing. What is also important
is how the mind is viewing or observing this experience. There is no
need to go around creating or doing, trying to follow different
experiences. Is an object wholesome or unwholesome? It is neither
wholesome nor unwholesome! An experience is an experience. An object is
an object. Objects will always be there. The knowing and observing are
the work of the mind. The mind knows all there is to be known. here's
the more important question: Is the mind observing with wholesome or
unwholesome mental qualities?

#### Why Are We Being Mindful? {#Section0011.xhtml_whyarewebeingmindful}

Why are we being mindful or aware? We practice because we want to
understand. We wait, observe, and study what is happening in the mind
and body so that we can understand their natures. We are not
intentionally trying to make the mind calm or trying to have "good
sittings". We meditate to see what is happening as it is and to have the
right attitude regarding what is happening (i.e. it is nature and
nothing personal). We need to see nature as nature, to recognize objects
as objects, and to know what is to be known.

As soon as there is a thought that this experience or object is good,
there is craving for it. When we see what is right as what is right,
what is there as what is there, then there is escape from craving.
However, when we don't know how to practice, the craving can only
increase. We are meditating to be free of craving and clinging.

#### Be Happy With The Awareness {#Section0011.xhtml_behappywiththeawareness}

You will see that experiences are just happening according to their own
nature when you wait and watch with awareness and intelligence. Let
whatever happens happen. There is no need to be happy or unhappy with
what is happening and there's no need to like or dislike any experience.

Whatever you are experiencing in this moment is the right experience. Be
happy that there is knowing and awareness as this in itself is already
wholesome.

> *The mind is not silent---it's always thinking! You should be happy in
> seeing nature as it is and in being able to recognize this.*

Knowing that the mind is not calm when it is not calm is sammā-di hi.
Being aware of thinking when there is thinking is right awareness. But
many times you may want this thinking to stop because you consider it
distracting. However, when you greedily try to make it still, it will
only complicate the issue and bring about tension.

#### Do All That Is Wholesome {#Section0011.xhtml_doallthatiswholesome}

Anything wholesome or unwholesome begins in the mind. Why is there
wholesomeness or unwholesomeness? These wholesome or unwholesome mental
qualities arise because of our reactions and responses to objects. All
that is wholesome begins with right attitude, right frame of mind, and
right attention (yoniso manasikāra). All that is unwholesome begins with
wrong attitude, wrong frame of mind, or wrong attention (ayoniso
manasikāra).

Always try to live with wholesome actions, skillful speech, and
wholesome qualities of mind. Do everything that is skillful: Give
offerings and practice generosity (dāna), observe morality (sīla),
develop stability of mind (samādhi), and practice vipassanā meditation
(bhāvanā). Among all of these wholesome actions, the practice of bhāvanā
is the highest, most wholesome action. So please don't forget your
goals.

One achieves Nibbāna only when all the wholesome qualities are there. A
mind without craving, aversion, or delusion is a mind full of wisdom and
such a mind can understand Nibbāna (please see book **Awareness Alone is
not Enough** for more). It's just difficult when there is insufficient
understanding and unwholesome mental qualities mixing in along with
experiences.

#### Awareness Gains Momentum {#Section0011.xhtml_awarenessgainsmomentum}

You want to be relaxed. Is the meditating mind unbiased, open, and
honest? When the mind doesn't want anything or is not dissatisfied with
anything, It's cool and has the right view. It sees nature as nature.
Awareness becomes continuous. At this point, you don't think negative
thoughts or say harmful things about others. Sīla is strong. The quality
of samādhi is inherent in the wisdom that is recognizing object as
object. It knows what there is to be known. Samādhi is present because
there isn't a craving for some other experience or dissatisfaction with
what is happening.

Keeping sīla and developing samādhi and paññā are the work of following
the teachings of the Buddha and continuing the Buddha's Dispensation
(sasana). Everything is already included in every instance where you
avoid wrongdoing and do what is right with awareness+wisdom.

Please check the meditating mind:

- Is there right attitude?
- Is the mind aware and alert? Or is it dull and heavy?
- Is there an interest for the practice?
- Is it aware of only one object? Can it be aware of more objects?
- How many objects can the mind be aware of?

As momentum builds in our practice, awareness will grow in strength. As
awareness becomes stronger, the observing mind becomes free from
wanting. It becomes possible to be aware of many objects simultaneously
and from different sense doors.

> *Awareness becomes like a satellite receiver that is able to capture
> many different channels. There is awareness of the observing mind and
> there is recognition of whether the attitude is right or wrong.*

The mind knows what it is doing. While all of this is happening, it is
nothing personal---it is not "my work" or "me". "I" am not aware; the
mind and object arise together and the mind is just aware. No one, no
entity, no person is behind this process. It is all nature.

We meditate for ourselves. Please continue your Dhamma work with
interest and respect.

### MINDFULNESS MEDITATION ESSENTIALS {#Section0012.xhtml_mindfulnessmeditationessentials}

- The meditating mind is naturally relaxed, calm, and peaceful. Learn to
  not focus, control, create, constrict, or restrict.

- Why is there so much focusing? It could be that you want a certain
  experience or you dislike what is happening.

- Do not create or reject and do not forget to be aware whenever
  something arises or passes away.

- Where is the mind? Is it paying attention to what is happening within
  (to mind and body)? Or is it paying attention to external phenomena
  (i.e. to other people)?

- A mind is a meditating mind when it doesn't have greed, anger, grief,
  or anxiety in it. You'll only tire yourself by practicing with wanting
  or expectations.

- Trying to create something means greed is at work. Rejecting something
  means aversion is at work. Not knowing when something arises or passes
  away means delusion is at work.

- Don't have any expectations, don't want anything, and don't be
  anxious, because if these attitudes are present in the mind, it
  becomes difficult to meditate.

- Regularly check the attitude in the meditating mind.

- We pay attention to and are aware of both the good and the bad.
  Meditation is accepting whatever arises, "good" or "bad," and
  observing it in a relaxed way.

- Is it meditation when we crave for what seems good or have an aversion
  to what seems bad?

- It's not right practice if we try to create the kind of experience we
  want. We are trying to know and observe what is happening as it is.

- There is something unbalanced or missing in the practice if the mind
  is tired or miserable. It becomes difficult to meditate when the mind
  feels tense or restricted. Check how you are meditating when you find
  your mind or body getting tired. Is the right attitude present in the
  mind?

- The meditating mind is relaxed and at peace. It's only possible to
  meditate with a light and free mind.

- What is the mind doing? What work is it doing? Is it lost in thought?
  Is it aware?

- Don't try to find fault with the thinking mind---you are not trying to
  stop thinking. Instead, you work to recognize thinking when there is
  thinking.

- Is the meditating mind, the mind that is aware, just knowing
  superficially, or knowing deeply and thoroughly?

- We are not trying to remove objects. However, we do want to understand
  the defilements that arise in relation to the objects and keep
  examining these defilements.

- The object is not really important. The observing mind that is working
  in the background to be aware is of real importance. If the observing
  is done with the right attitude, then any object is the right object.

- Only when there is faith or confidence (saddhā), will effort (viriya)
  arise. Only when there's effort will mindfulness (sati) become
  continuous. Only when mindfulness is continuous will there be a
  steady, stable mind (samādhi). With the steadiness of mind, you will
  begin to understand things as they are (paññā). When you see reality
  as it is, then faith and confidence (saddhā) grow even stronger.

- Maintain awareness in the present moment---don't revisit the past or
  speculate on the future.

### FROM MOMENT TO MOMENTUM {#Section0013.xhtml_frommomenttomomentum}

When people think of meditation, they imagine a yogi sitting with his
eyes closed. The sitting posture alone doesn't mean the yogi is
meditating. He could be sitting very still, lost in thoughts!

So when do we meditate? Do we begin when we get to the Dhamma Hall? We
meditate wherever we are, from when we wake up to the time we fall
asleep. Can't we also meditate in the shower or washroom? Don't just sit
and daydream away on the toilet! Remember to be aware at any time, when
you are in the Dhamma Hall, on the walkway, while brushing your teeth,
washing up, cleaning, taking a shower, reading, talking, hanging
clothes, or doing any other daily activity.

Since this is a practice we do consistently over the entire day, it
isn't necessary to spend so much energy all at once.

> *The mind, however, needs to be awake, alert, relaxed and balanced as
> these mental qualities allow wisdom to arise.*

It is Dhamma only when we learn to meditate, are able to meditate, and
continue to meditate.

#### Any Object {#Section0013.xhtml_anyobject}

Observe your body now. What do you observe when you are aware without
pinpointing a specific place like the nostrils or abdomen? Know that you
are sitting, standing, walking, feeling heat, hearing, etc. Do you see
only when you look? Can you also see without looking? There is the sound
of the clock and the sound of birds in the Dhamma Hall. You can hear
these without listening. How hard is it to be aware of all these things?
Does it take much energy? You only have to be aware like this the whole
day.

Please don't think that one object or place is better than another
because one object is not better than another object. Objects are
objects and they are all just arising according to their own natures. As
such, it doesn't matter what object you begin with. Start with any of
the six sense objects suitable for you. But remember that whatever you
begin with, having awareness and wisdom is what's important.

#### Check The Meditating Mind {#Section0013.xhtml_checkthemeditatingmind}

When you put on red tinted glasses, everything you look at will be red.
With blue tinted glasses, everything you look at will be blue. Observing
objects with greed or aversion is like wearing these tinted glasses.
When the observing mind watches with greed, then the objects will be
objects of lobha. When the observing mind watches with aversion, then
the objects will be objects of dosa. The mind can't see an object as an
object (or dhamma object) anymore.

It is difficult to see this greed or aversion in the mind when you are
very intent on watching objects (without seeing what is happening in the
observing mind). Is there greed? Is there aversion? It's not what is
happening with objects that matters, but how the mind is observing them
that is important.

> *Only when the mind observes without lobha, dosa, or moha do objects
> become dhamma objects.*

#### Observing Naturally {#Section0013.xhtml_observingnaturally}

When does the mind feel tightness or tension? There is tension when the
mind wants something other than what is happening or when the mind
rejects what is happening. Defilements don't want to let things be as
they are; they want something to happen, they want results, or they want
to control what is happening and they'll force, focus, create, or
restrict to get what they want.

Instead of creating, focusing, or restricting, we want to only wait and
watch. Is there any need to focus if we let whatever happens happen? If
we are not looking for anything special or specific, we don't need so
much energy. We only need intelligence and interest:

- What is happening?
- How is it working?

If we want to observe how something is working naturally as it is, we
also have to observe naturally. That's why I say not to control or force
anything. We just let the body do its job while we pay attention to the
mind and are aware as much as we can be aware, consistently throughout
the day.

#### Sitting Meditation {#Section0013.xhtml_sittingmeditation}

What can you observe? You can observe whatever object that arises. If
the mind's attention goes to the nostrils, you can observe that. If
attention goes to your hands, you can observe that as well. Are you
going to put your attention back at the nostrils if your attention is
already at your hand? No. Working to put your attention back at the
nostrils when the mind is paying attention to something else is too
tiring. What is the difference between the objects at the nostrils and
the objects at your hand? There's no difference!

What happens when the mind pays attention to sounds? (Yogis: "We'll
become aware of the sounds.") Are sounds going to bother you? They
shouldn't bother you if you just consider sounds as natural phenomena.
You just want to recognize hearing if there is hearing.

> *When you initially begin meditating, you may find the mind feeling
> agitated, drowsy, or restless. That's not a problem.*

In daily life, you've accomplished things mainly using
defilement-produced mental energy. Here, because you are asked to
practice without craving or aversion, the mind initially loses strength
and becomes weak. Within a couple of days, as you develop a little more
awareness, stability and calm, you'll find the mind more awake. What
will happen when the mind wakes up a bit? You will notice many, many
thoughts! But don't worry---this is just nature and not a problem at
all.

> *Thoughts may only seem like a problem if you have the preconception
> that they are distracting you from your practice and you try to stop
> the thinking.*

But aren't thoughts also the mind? If you really want to learn about the
mind, these thoughts are showing the way. Can you observe this? So why
is there an aversion to thoughts? (Yogis: "There are feelings and
emotions that come about because of these thoughts.") If that's the
case, how are you going to view these feelings? Are they a nuisance?
(Yogis: "We'll take them as objects.") Yes. When you recognize these
feelings as objects, then the practice becomes vipassanā meditation.

Please don't set your sitting meditation to the clock. If you have
determined that you will sit for a set time period, you may begin to
worry when you have to break your determination for some reason. The
resulting anxiety will destabilize the mind and weaken samādhi. So,
don't set any special time. It's enough to know what is happening in the
moment. It's also ok to get up and walk if it is difficult to sit. Just
remember to maintain awareness of what is happening in the mind and
body.

#### Walking Meditation {#Section0013.xhtml_walkingmeditation}

Walking meditation is just like sitting meditation in that you are just
aware of whatever is arising or happening. Let the body go in an easy,
natural manner. Walk in a natural way and at a natural pace. Please
don't walk extremely slowly.

Don't force yourself to watch objects just related to the body while
walking. You will get tense from keeping your attention at your feet for
the hour or so that you are practicing walking meditation. Just be aware
of the body as a whole. If the mind becomes aware of sweating, know
that. If it is aware of the hands, know that too. Are your hands
clasped? Are they swinging? You can be aware of all of these actions.

You can also be aware of what you see, hear, think, smell, touch, or
feel while walking.

- What is the mind aware of?
- How is the mind?
- What is happening in the mind?
- What state is it in? Is it at peace?

It's good if you can be aware of the intention to stop or to move. It's
even better if you can recognize why you continue walking.

#### Eating Meditation {#Section0013.xhtml_eatingmeditation}

Which one should be stronger: The desire to eat or the desire to
practice?

> *Greediness tends to come in as soon as a meal begins. Observe the
> mind first. The eagerness to eat is very strong.*

There's a certain high feeling that accompanies this desire to eat.
Awareness is either very weak or not present in the presence of this
strong eagerness. How is the mind while you are eating? Is it relaxed?
Check regularly that you are not eating with eagerness. The wanting is
pretty obvious and the mind will feel a bit tight when there is a desire
to eat. The mind is planning the different ways to combine food on the
plate. How will you eat? What will you eat after you finish this
portion? The mind is already planning the next scoop. So unless you are
paying attention to what the mind is doing, you'll just continue down
the path of thinking and planning motivated by eagerness.

Don't be so concentrated on the food or plate. Instead, continue to
observe the mind while you are eating. More and more, try to recognize
how the mind is working while you are eating.

- What state of mind are you eating with?
- How is the mind feeling?
- Is it relaxed? Is it intent on eating?

When the mind is relaxed, you can observe how you are moving your body.
For example, you can observe how you are holding the utensils, touching,
opening your mouth, chewing, or breaking apart pieces. You can also know
different tastes like saltiness or spiciness. You can know any or all of
these. Can't you also observe what you like and what you don't like? Is
being hungry the same as wanting to eat? Being hungry happens in the
body. Wanting to eat happens in the mind and is the work of thinking.
Sometimes the mental desire to eat and the bodily sensation of hunger
become interconnected. You just want to observe these things and
everything that is happening as it is.

#### Daily Activities {#Section0013.xhtml_dailyactivities}

Meditation doesn't happen only in sitting. How do you get up from
sitting meditation to go to your daily activities? Please get up and go
with awareness. As you transition from your sitting meditation to
various daily activities, please do not forget this: Be mindful. There
ought to be continuity of awareness throughout the day whether in
sitting, standing, eating, going, or doing daily activities, making it
harder for unwholesome thoughts to enter.

You can be aware of what the mind is doing as you go up or down the
stairs, as you put your keys in the lock, or open and close the door. Do
you enter your room with your head first or your feet first? You need to
observe yourself in these daily activities. What do you do when you are
back in your room? Do you just take your shawl off and toss it on the
bed? Continue to be aware of what you can while you are in your room.
You can learn from whatever is happening. Every moment is the right
moment for meditation.

> *See all the different activities you can be aware of in your daily
> activities, from washing your face, to brushing your teeth, combing
> your hair, to changing clothes. Try to be aware of all these things
> down to the smallest activity.*

Observing these bodily actions may be dominant in the beginning, but it
is important to regularly check the mind as the meditating mind is more
important than what is happening in the body. Have interest in whatever
is happening, and whatever you are doing. You want to know everything
about how the mind and body are operating here.

Also see what you can be aware of as you go to bed and as you fall
asleep. When you wake up, you can be aware of the groggy feeling or
wanting to go back to sleep. This is also meditation.

- What are you aware of the moment you wake up?
- Is the body on its back? Is it on its stomach?
- What is happening in the body?
- What is happening in the mind?

You are using your intelligence and wisdom and continually sharpening
them for the practice in this way by being interested in the process of
meditation, in what you are doing, and by asking these kinds of
questions:

- What is this?
- What is happening?
- Why is it happening?

When you think about your practice and how you are practicing, you are
basically filling the mind with wholesome thoughts, making it more
difficult for unwholesome thoughts to arise. Meditation is the work of
sharpening awareness, and developing stability of mind and wisdom. Here
are some more questions you can consider:

- What am I doing?
- How am I meditating?
- Am I practicing the right way?
- How do I proceed with the practice?

In the beginning, you may feel a little tired when you are learning how
to practice skillfully. Once you know how to practice with the right
attitude, both the mind and body will feel at peace.

#### Pain {#Section0013.xhtml_pain}

It's greed at work if you immediately change your posture to alleviate a
little discomfort! On the other hand, determining not to move at any
cost could be aversion at work. Of course nobody likes these aches,
sharp pains, dull pains, or itchiness. Aversion will naturally arise in
the mind when you observe this pain. You can begin to recognize these
reactions at work and avoid falling into either extreme of immediately
changing or not moving at any cost.

Is it meditation if you continue to be aware of this pain with aversion
in the meditating mind? For example, what happens when you are angry at
someone and the mind takes this person's image as an object? Similarly,
pain will increase when the mind observes it with aversion. As soon as
there is pain, the mind is attracted to the pain and pays attention to
it. This happens not because it is a pleasant experience but because it
is an undesirable one!

What can you do in this situation? While the pain may be quite prominent
at this point, please don't look at the pain just yet. Don't look at
this pain directly when there is resistance. Check the mind first. How
do you see or view this pain? How is the mind thinking about this pain?
There are thoughts associated with this pain. The mind will feel
constricted and tense with the presence of this pain. It's difficult to
live with this discomfort. Try to see the sensation in the body and the
mental feelings associated with this sensation happening together.

> *So after you have changed the object of attention from the pain to
> the mind, you can have an attitude of "let it be."*

The mind's attitude towards it can be, "It can pass away on its own, or
stay for some time. I'll just observe as much as I can handle and I'll
move only when it is not possible to watch like this."

So when there is pain, observe the mind. There's a little discomfort in
the mind and It's finding it hard to live with this pain. Aversion
exaggerates the situation, making the pain seem stiff, hard, or solid.
In reality, it may not be that painful. In the absence of aversion,
there are just subtle sensations; the pain will no longer seem solid.
Even the initial concept of "pain" may disappear.

In short, there is some wisdom in backing up a bit only when you can't
handle the situation. Trying to escape when pain first appears doesn't
have any element of wisdom. Lobha is only satisfied in shifting
positions and dosa becomes dissatisfied that it has to change postures.
Only wisdom recognizes things as they are.

So you can work so that only when you can't handle the pain will you try
to back up a bit, relax, and change your position. When making these
changes, do so with awareness---this is also a part of meditation. The
Buddha never told us not to move while meditating. If there is a need to
shift your body, please do so. Or if moving is not necessary, don't
move. There is no wisdom in forcing yourself to bear and endure pain
when it has become very intense in the body.

Little by little, you can try to increase the time that you are sitting
and you will also find that you are able to sit there longer. Once the
mind is clear and cool (with the right attitude present), you can
observe anything you want. This relaxed mind, when looking at what was
considered "pain" before, will no longer consider it painful. When the
mind begins to understand this, acceptance will naturally follow.

#### Vedanā {#Section0013.xhtml_vedana}

So long as there is a mind, there will be mental feeling and the
presence of some kind of vedanā: Sukha vedanā, dukkha vedanā or uppekha
vedanā. These are pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral feelings. So long as
there is a body, there will be aches, pains, sickness, or disease.

> *What is more important: For vedanā to disappear or to learn about
> vedanā?*

So what does it mean to overcome vedanā? You overcome vedanā when the
mind doesn't react with greed or aversion but remains with
awareness+wisdom. The way I understand it is that there are no
unpleasant mental feelings (domanassa) or pleasant mental feelings
(somanassa) in the mind in the presence of what is happening in the
body. The mind lives in equanimity (upekkhā) and wisdom. That's what it
means to overcome vedanā.

Even when we say we want to learn about an object, there is frequently a
rejection of the unpleasant object and a desire for it to disappear. We
want to make something negative go away quickly and we make an effort to
end it. When something positive arises, we try to make it last a little
longer. Is this Dhamma?

> *Your job is to recognize any feeling as just feeling. This feeling is
> not a person or entity and it also doesn't have anything to do with
> "you".*

You practice for this type of understanding and wisdom to arise. When
you realize that this is nothing personal, you'll no longer find an
issue with this. It is only a problem when you take this feeling as
"yours". So please recognize the underlying attitude that is present
when this feeling arises. You practice because you want to understand.

#### Anger Is Anger. It Is Just One Dhamma Nature. {#Section0013.xhtml_angerisanger.itisjustonedhammanature.}

Shwe Oo Min Sayadaw used to ask, "How big is your anger---as big as a
fist or as big as a ball?" Is Chinese anger stronger than Indian anger?
One is not stronger than another because they're the same! Anger is
anger.

We are used to labeling anger that's happening in others as "their
anger" and anger happening within as "my anger". That's wrong view.
While we meditate to understand the true nature of these defilements, we
can't learn when we take possession of these defilements as our own.

Anger and greed each have their own specific natures. Anger is rough and
has the nature of breaking or destruction. Greed, on the other hand, has
the nature of clinging and entangling; greed doesn't want to let go.

It's the nature of the mind to have good experiences followed by bad
experiences and vice versa while we are meditating. With wrong views and
ideas, greed or anger comes in; with right views, wisdom arises. Our
difficulties arise from not having the right background information and
not understanding the nature of the mind. It is difficult to practice
without a thorough understanding of how to practice. When there's real
understanding, everything works out well.

#### Consistent Effort {#Section0013.xhtml_consistenteffort}

> *We want the type of awareness that develops naturally from consistent
> effort, moment-to-moment.*

We don't want this doing, forceful effort that uses a lot of energy all
at once, only to slack off when we are tired. When we get some energy
back, we may recover from our drowsiness and start to be aware once
again. It's impossible to develop continuity of awareness in this random
way.

Please work toward continuity in awareness. When there is continuity of
awareness and the mind is able to see the whole process of what comes
before and what happens after, without forcing, the mind will begin to
recognize cause and effect.

Only work to be aware of what is happening and what comes next. There is
only this work and no other work. With persistence, you will develop a
certain mental fortitude and confidence in yourself. Try it out if you
don't believe me. You'll experience happiness when you are able to see
this for yourself. Where is this happiness coming from? This is
happiness that arises from knowing.

#### Awareness Gains Momentum {#Section0013.xhtml_awarenessgainsmomentum}

When sati and samādhi are weak and defilements are very strong in the
mind, you will not be able to see reality no matter how much you try.
Without the continuity of awareness, the mind sees something, misses
something, and sees something again. Can you thoroughly understand the
whole story if you've missed a couple of episodes in a TV series? This
inconsistency makes it difficult to grasp a complete picture and wisdom
doesn't have a chance to develop. That's why I emphasize consistent,
continuous awareness.

> *You only try to be aware more continuously so that there is a chance
> for momentum to grow.*

As awareness gains strength, the mind will be aware of many more things
and awareness develops a momentum of its own. You don't do the work of
being aware of more and more objects.

#### Value Of Awareness {#Section0013.xhtml_valueofawareness}

When you begin meditating, the sati, samādhi, and paññā that were absent
before are now present. Appreciate the presence of these wholesome
qualities in the mind. What is the value of awareness? What does
awareness remove? Awareness removes and replaces non-awareness.

We meditate because we want to understand defilements. We want to be
aware of the defilements that arise as dhamma nature. What is wholesome
is dhamma nature and what is unwholesome is also dhamma nature.

> *We practice to have the right attitude, to understand dhamma nature,
> and to extinguish defilements.*

### MORE QUESTIONS... {#Section0014.xhtml_morequestions}

What is your attitude? Is it right or wrong? - Are you interested in the
present moment? - Do you want anything? - Is the mind relaxed? - How
much energy are you using? - What does the mind think about the
experience?

Is awareness present? - How does it feel to be aware? - How does it feel
not to be aware? What is the difference between awareness and
non-awareness? - If awareness is present, what is the quality of
awareness? Why is it strong or weak? - Is awareness continuous? - What
do you understand because of awareness in this moment? - What is the
benefit of having awareness?

How is the mind reacting to the experience? - Why is the mind reacting
or not reacting? - How do you feel when you notice an object?

Is there defilement present?

- Why does it arise?
- Why does it disappear?

What does the mind know? What is the mind doing? What ideas do you have
about your practice?

### IN A NUTSHELL {#Section0015.xhtml_inanutshell}

The following are a medley of Ashin Tejaniya's reflections, ideas,
suggestions, and mini-cases for consideration. They have been translated
from Dhamma discussions, morning Dhamma reminders, and Ashin Tejaniya's
little blue instruction book in Burmese. Since these are pieces taken
out of context, not everything may make sense at first glance to yogis
who aren't yet familiar with his teachings. Do take what immediately
speaks to you and your personal experience and keep the rest for another
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is the nature of the mind to know. Everyone already has this nature
of awareness which we are practicing to nurture, strengthen, and grow.
We only need more right practice, without forcing or focusing. The
momentum and strength of awareness will develop naturally when we
practice consistently, moment-to-moment, without breaks. That is called
right effort (sammā-vāyāma).

There is a vast difference between a mind that is aware and a mind
without awareness. The kind of awareness that comes from energetic
focusing lasts only briefly. The kind of awareness that develops
naturally from continuous practice is longer lasting and doesn't just
disappear because of some external causes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

People come to the meditation center with plans to put in a lot of
effort and to achieve as much as possible within a short period of time.
That's just the work of lobha!

Meditation is for the long-haul, a practice we do for life, without rest
until final liberation. We need to learn how to be skillful at running
this marathon and learn to nurture all the wholesome mental qualities
possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We don't "give you Dhamma" here. We do teach you how to become skillful
at meditation. That's what I'm interested in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In your daily life, you can't meditate by forcing awareness or
unnaturally putting in extra energy into your practice. You have come
here to learn a way of practice that you can apply to your daily life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you are meditating, there is what is happening (objects) and what
is meditating (the mind). If you only pay attention to what is happening
without paying attention to how the mind is observing, you won't be
aware of the greed or aversion developing in the mind in reaction to
what is happening.

You'll begin to understand meditation when you are interested in
learning more about the mind and you pay attention to the observing
mind. Being skillful at meditation is a type of wisdom and more
important than "getting Dhamma". That will come naturally once you learn
how to meditate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Think about it: As long as we want to see or experience specific
objects, there is still greed. We can't say we are meditating when we
are practicing with greed in the observing / meditating mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you first begin, It's not enough only to have awareness. You need
to reinforce it with other supports: Think about how you are going to
practice and what is happening in the mind and body, for example. There
are fewer chances to indulge in unwholesome thoughts when the mind is
filled with wholesome thoughts. The mind can't simultaneously think two
things. If there is right thinking, there can't be wrong thinking, or
getting lost in thinking. Give the mind a job and make it work. Momentum
builds from having awareness for longer periods from moment-to-moment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We need momentum to be successful in all areas of life including
education, business, or profession. Momentum is also needed for
meditation to grow. But remember that this momentum doesn't come from
exerting a lot of energy! If we exert a lot of energy, we will have only
wasted that energy by the end of the day. We want a momentum that comes
out of practicing steadily, without stopping.

Anyone with gardening experience can relate to this: If you want to grow
flowers, what do you do? Do you think, "This flower's certainly taking a
long time..." and yank it out of the soil? No! Of course, you water it
and you put in the appropriate amount of fertilizer. The flower will do
its own job of growing. You can't force it to grow. You only figure out
the environmental conditions that will help the flower thrive.

Similarly, in meditation, you figure out and fulfill the conditions that
will help the practice thrive. That's why I ask you to practice
consistently and continuously. When momentum builds up, awareness will
be there even if you don't want it to be there. That's why you want to
practice steadily, throughout the day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most yogis know that they ought to practice diligently. However, few
yogis are clear on how to practice diligently.

Many yogis work diligently to focus on an object. In reality, we are
practicing to properly understand the underlying characteristics of an
object. Instead of using only effort to practice, we also need to use
awareness along with intelligence to learn about these objects. Only
then will understanding arise. When we say viriya is needed, the kind of
viriya we're talking about is not focusing energy. The kind of viriya
that's needed is perseverance. Applying our knowledge, the right
attitude, and wisdom is what's needed for right effort (sammā-vāyāma).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Meditation is - Practicing to recognize objects as they arise, and -
Developing wisdom in the mind that is observing these objects.

It is not the work of mindfulness meditation to make objects disappear.
We are not meditating to get rid of objects nor are we trying to see or
create experiences in the present based on our preconceived ideas of
meditation. We practice to recognize and to understand the nature of
whatever is happening.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Knowing what is wrong is very important. It's only when you recognize
what is wrong that you will also begin to understand what is right.
There is a lot you can learn from what you think are unfavorable
conditions for meditation. There may be unhappiness or suffering. Don't
make judgments that these conditions are bad for practice. There is no
such thing as "bad meditation". In Dhamma, there is only what's
happening. Accept the situation and be aware. It's already good if you
are aware of what's happening. However, people pay attention mostly to
what is happening and just go around in circles as a result of having
judged something as "good" or "bad".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no need to try to control or restrict your movements when you
are meditating. Don't walk very slowly or too fast. Just walk at a
natural pace. Do whatever you need to do naturally throughout the day.
You are learning and practicing to see how you can better pay attention
and be aware of whatever is happening.

In comparing the mind and body (physical form), which one is faster?
(The mind!) So, instead of slowing down your bodily movements, practice
to sharpen and strengthen your mental faculties so that they become
natural.

We can see without looking. We can hear without listening. We can also
smell without sniffing. In the same way, we can be naturally aware
without focusing, without putting in forceful energy. Once there is a
natural awareness, we only work to maintain it for longer periods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You see things as they are happening. Isn't it considered even better
awareness when you are able to see all of this compared to seeing only
one thing?

When there is a lot of delusion, It's difficult to observe even one
object. As the mind's receiver becomes even stronger, it can be aware of
many objects and capture many more channels because the strength and
scope of awareness widens.

There is so much arising at the six sense doors in this present moment.
If you are able to be aware of as many of these as possible, isn't it
sammā-sati? So the fact that the mind can see more objects in vipassanā
means that sati is getting stronger. It is harder for moha to arise when
the mind is knowing with some wisdom present. That's why wisdom needs to
be in there along with awareness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you have become more experienced with the practice, you ought to be
able to meditate with any of the six sense objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yogis tell me how difficult it is to practice in their daily lives
because there are so many more objects outside than at the center. What
kind of objects do you think they are referring to? True, there are many
more conceptual objects (paññatti) outside like cars, people, or
buildings. That's what people pay attention to, but only because they
haven't understood ultimate reality (paramattha) yet. Ultimate reality
here is also ultimate reality outside. There are only six sense doors /
objects in the retreat center and only six sense doors / objects in
daily life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is nothing more interesting than using Dhamma in daily life.
People don't use the Dhamma that much in daily life because they don't
know the quality, value, and inherent worth of the Dhamma. Someone who
really practices outside will know the value of this practice as
something they can't do without.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You need to modify your ideas about meditation practice: You're not
*returning home... you're going back to another retreat center!* Think
of your home as a retreat center. Right now, you view walking meditation
here differently from walking outside in daily life.

Here in the retreat center, maintaining awareness takes priority for
you. Outside, there is a lot more eagerness when the ideas of my house,
my home, or my family are propelling you. So you need to begin by
altering the way you see your home. Practice becomes smoother when your
views towards your home are similar to your views towards a retreat
center. Right now, as soon as you go home, all the tasks you need to do
outside already take priority.

This has a lot to do with attitude. When you are outside again, keep
checking your attitudes, views, thinking and background ideas. When you
begin to view your home in the same way that you view the meditation
center, your practice will also work out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are so many opportunities to practice generosity (dāna) out in
daily life. For example, you give way to a person who wants to get past
you while you're driving. Isn't that dāna? Is it dāna only when you
offer money? What about giving someone space? Moving over and giving the
spot you were going to take for yourself is dāna. We are practicing dāna
whenever we are giving.

When I was practicing in the market, I noticed that people didn't really
pay attention to where they were going because they were absorbed in
their thoughts or counting money as they walked. We had a lot of people
walking around anxious or lost in thoughts. They kept bumping into me so
many times that I got upset! (Laughs) I had to keep moving out of their
way. There was awareness present as I just gently moved over for them.
As I kept moving out of people's way, I found myself starting to enjoy
giving over that space.

When you start to have awareness, you'll see these things. What about
smiling? Doesn't that make the other person happy to see that? What's
easier on the eyes: A scowling face or a smiling face? So dāna is not
just about money. Giving space is dāna too. Give what you can, if you
can. Of course all of this depends on the quality of mind. If the mental
state is negative, there's nothing you'll want to give. When mental
qualities are wholesome, then It's easier to give whenever someone needs
or asks for something.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We practice to bring out awareness and to strengthen wholesome qualities
in the mind. We become aware of objects when the mental faculties are
balanced and sharp enough to be aware of them. We don't see something
just because we want to see it. We only see as much as we are capable of
seeing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Intentionally putting strength into our practice doesn't necessarily
strengthen awareness. We'll only lose that energy! Only when there is
wisdom combined with awareness will the mind grow in strength. When we
meditate with the right attitude and right view, our mind and spiritual
faculties will improve, fueling a wholesome desire (chanda) to continue
practicing.

Alternatively, practicing with defilement-motivated attitudes will
weaken the mind and body. We will also get bored with the practice,
eventually losing the wholesome desire to keep on meditating.

Why is it that the Dhamma and the practice don't follow yogis out to
their daily lives? Why don't yogis sustain the desire to meditate
continuously and consistently? It is because many yogis come to rest
instead of coming to learn to be skillful in growing understanding. A
yogi whose practice is aimed at developing calm may stop practicing
wholeheartedly when she reaches that state. On the other hand, a yogi
who practices to understand the truth will not rest until she has
understood thoroughly. If yogis became skillful in developing
understanding, then they could use this practice anywhere.

In fact, when the mind is in a calm, steady state, it is in a position
to do dhamma investigation. It's ready to practice with intelligence and
ready to study and learn about what is happening. If we don't realize
that this is the way to proceed at this point, the greedy mind will just
step in and enjoy this calm state, which is exactly what many yogis do!

Why are we meditating? Do we meditate to calm the mind down? Or do we
practice to understand things as they are? Tranquility is not an end
goal but a side-effect in mindfulness meditation. When we understand
dhamma nature very deeply, tranquility comes as an inherent part of this
wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yogis tend to close their eyes when they want to meditate. Many yogis
who have been practicing for some time may not be adept yet in
meditating while looking, seeing, and talking, as they haven't had much
practice in these areas. Keeping your eyes closed or open is not what is
important. What is key is whether the mind is wholesome or unwholesome.

- Is looking the same as seeing?
- Can you see without looking?

Ask some questions while meditating. This interest, inquiry, and
curiosity can determine how narrow or expansive the field of awareness
can be. If you limit yourself only to our discussion questions, this
will only take you so far.

In my early days of practice, I had heard people talk about the nature
of impermanence. I asked myself, "Is there anything that might be
permanent?" I experimented and looked around... I still haven't found
it, although it might be out there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you just wait and watch, there is more awareness of objects and
awareness of the mind knowing these objects as well. You'll know for
sure when there is awareness and you'll also know for sure when
awareness isn't there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First, awareness leads. Then after practicing for some time and many
understandings later, awareness and wisdom will arise together. Later
on, wisdom leads. It's not so easy for this to happen. We need to gather
a lot of information when we are doing the practice of awareness+wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why do we have to practice? We practice because defilements are very
strong. Just observe your mind. With anything that happens, is greed or
aversion already present? Or is there awareness+wisdom? How does the
mind feel when there are unwholesome mental states? What does it
experience? Do you feel dissatisfied or frustrated by the experience? Or
can you accept what is happening as it is? Continuing to practice with
wrong attitudes will only fuel more aversion and you may eventually
become discouraged with the situation.

When there is right attitude with wisdom, it is possible for the mind to
accept things as they are. But do note that while wisdom accepts
whatever is happening as objects, wisdom does not accept unwholesome
qualities in the observing mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A yogi who is always watching the mind will notice each time that
unwholesome mental states arise. It may seem as if there is a great deal
of these states happening. If the yogi views what is happening with the
wrong attitude that these are personally happening to him, he'll become
distressed.

When awareness and wisdom grow, with the right attitude working in the
background, this yogi may even feel joyful interest (pīti somanassa) in
recognizing these states as they are. here's an analogy: If a policeman
were able to catch the thief every time he stole something, this
policeman would be promoted up the ranks. On the other hand, a demotion
might be headed his way if the policeman kept missing the thief!

Here, the thief is always stealing something! Are you going to
experience objects with defilements whenever they arise? Or are you
going to observe with wisdom? Pay attention with awareness+wisdom.
Otherwise, defilements will have already taken over the experience!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you recognize thinking as thinking, the mind becomes clear. The
mind becomes clear because of awareness. Otherwise, when the mind isn't
aware of thinking happening, it can be cloudy or hazy. Thinking is not a
problem when you can recognize it as an object, just like you recognize
breathing as an object. You may have heard from others that too many
thoughts are not good and you won't get any samādhi from it. Don't make
these decisions based on objects. What's more important is that
awareness is present. If there's awareness, It's good. The objects have
nothing to do with you. If awareness is strong, thoughts will lessen by
themselves. Even then, we are only talking about a decrease in
surface-level thinking.

Thoughts related to what's happening at home or about some unfinished
business are primarily surface-level thinking. When these lessen and you
see more subtle thoughts, it may seem like there is a lot happening. You
may notice a whole lot more thoughts happening at a subtle level! These
will seem to have increased. The mind is talking from the moment you
wake up to when you go to bed... it's so loud sometimes. What does the
mind say as soon as it wakes up? "I need to use the toilet." (Laughs)

In fact, these are thoughts that can only be seen when sati and samādhi
are strong. The mind is labeling different things, judging, reading
signs or numbers, talking, or interpreting meanings. When sati was
weaker, you couldn't see the mind at work every time there was contact
with objects. You can only see this subtle thinking when sati and
samādhi are good. There'll be many thoughts and they're fast.

Behind this mental dialogue is some idea working in the background.
Lobha talks a certain way and dosa talks in a different way. You can
recognize these things. In the beginning, you took the storyline as an
object. Later on, when you see the thinking itself as an object, you
don't pay that much attention to the storyline. You see the nature of
thoughts and thoughts as objects to be known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We don't get something just because we want it or just the way we want
it. We can only get as much as there are causes and conditions in place
for something to happen or how much we put into the practice according
to our abilities. When we understand this point, the wanting for
something or some experience will eventually lessen. It will be replaced
by a wholesome desire to become skillful at cultivating the conditions
to fulfill the causes through meditation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For those who are trying to get the Dhamma: Have you ever considered
what the Dhamma is really about?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not easy to see the mind. When you do see the mind, It's not easy
for understanding to arise. Defilements are even tougher to understand.
You must always, always be interested in the mind and continually learn
about it.

The most important ingredient here is having the right attitude: What is
happening is dhamma nature, an object to be known or observed. Once
there is right view and right attitude present, be diligent with
moment-to-moment awareness. Don't interfere with objects! Let whatever
happens, happen because it has nothing to do with "you". With momentum,
the field of awareness expands and wisdom is sure to follow.

When the observing mind grows in strength and wisdom, it will begin to
see the different machinations and variations used by defilements. For
now, defilements have all the entry-points mapped out because the mind
has been their playground for so long. The emerging wisdom is not smart
enough to counter the defilements running circles around it. But there
is no need to get upset over this---you can study and learn from each
experience so long as there is awareness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most people pay attention to concepts (paññatti). Ultimate reality
(paramattha) can't be discerned by a mind with moha. Awareness knows
that objects are happening or arising, but only wisdom goes through to
the heart of what is happening to understand its natural
characteristics.

So think about it: If we meditate with a strong, fixed concentration
(but without right view) instead of learning about defilements and
becoming skillful in thinning them down---it becomes possible to create
any experience we want! We can create anything, even the concept of
Nibbāna, with strong concentration. That's why I'm so wary of this kind
of concentration. It can create anything it wants!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You will only grab hold of concepts if you follow the storyline. The
past and future are merely in the storyline. The nature of what is
happening is the mind and the mind is arising in the present moment. So
if you know there is thinking when there is thinking, that's awareness
at work already.

Don't immediately assume that the mind is agitated when you see
thoughts. There is awareness because the mind has some measure of
calmness. Only when there is no awareness can you say the mind is not
calm. But so long as the mind is aware of the thinking, there is already
some sort of stability there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The mind can and will create a great many things and will believe the
things it has created if it has never seen very subtle levels of mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let me say something here about how perception and wisdom work. You hear
a sound. It's assumed that the mind already recognizes sound as an
object here. So when you hear this sound, doesn't the mind interpret the
sound as the sound of birds, the bell, or crickets? Perception (saññā)
interprets the sound and creates meaning out of it while wisdom (paññā)
knows this sound as sound. Do you think this is happening one by one?
It's not. It's all included and happening together, in one time. When
you are able to see the different parts of the mind working in this way,
you can see many things at once. There is no need to meditate on the
sound and its concept separately. They're happening together and the
mind already knows it.

Are we trying to get rid of concepts? No! Remember that we're not
practicing to get rid of saññā here. We're only trying to reduce taking
concepts as objects but concepts need to be there. Without concepts, we
can't even walk or go up the stairs. When we take the stairs, saññā has
already memorized the distance between each step. Just try adding a
couple of inches to the steps we're used to climbing regularly and we'd
trip! What we are doing is just paying more attention to reality
(paramattha).

Saññā does the work of remembering at the moment that there is contact
with an object. When there is contact with object, there is already a
perception of it. How can we erase this interpretation when it is just a
natural part of the mind? Yogis try to just note sound as just sound,
sound, sound and it is possible to do this if there is focusing. Yogis
can totally lose the concept of "birds" or "crickets" in the process and
they think that they are being in the present moment this way. It's
actually not the present moment when we lose all recognition of what the
object is and any possibility for wisdom to arise in that moment.

A yogi who came to practice with just seeing, seeing, hearing, hearing
found that he couldn't practice at all any more once he left the center.
Why? We need saññā to function. Don't we need to know how much we're
selling a product for? How can we answer questions without the use of
concepts or if we only hear sounds without an idea of the meaning of
those sounds? That's not how Dhamma works.

We know the knowing mind (viññāṇa), we know intentions, we know the
feeling mind (vedanā) but we may not recognize how saññā is working.
Fewer people will recognize saññā at work. Take an example of meeting a
person for the first time. Won't you remember him when you see him the
next day? How do you remember? You remember because of the work of
saññā. You'll be able to understand this and see it clearly if you
observe the workings of the mind.

Of course if you work in such a way that you focus in on an object so
the mind can't think, it wouldn't be able to connect the concept with
the object either. But doing that is basically trying to stop a natural
process and to stop saññā from working. Not being able to think has no
element of wisdom within it! There is no interpretation of meaning only
because saññā has been suppressed but there can't be any further
understanding of object and/or mind and causal relationships. Of course,
lobha or dosa can't come in but what about moha? Moha is there in full.

So, in observing, don't try to break apart the five aggregates of form
(rūpa), feeling (vedanā), perception (saññā), mental formations
(saṅkhāra), and consciousness (viññāṇa). Instead, you can see how they
are each doing their own job. For example, if you take the roof off a
restaurant and peer in from the top, you'll see the boss sitting at the
counter, the waiter walking around, the customers having their meals,
and the chef cooking in the kitchen. Does each person start his role
only when someone else has finished his function? No! They're all
happening simultaneously. It's the same with the five aggregates.

In short, mindfulness meditation is not about stopping a process that's
happening but about understanding the reality or the truth of that
process. People try to stop or cut off processes when they notice a lot
of concepts. Wisdom can't arise that way. Wisdom can come in only when
there is a clear seeing of mental functions doing their own jobs and
lobha or dosa don't follow close behind. With much practice, you can see
the object, how the mind feels, how it reacts, and how It's working. In
the beginning, you may alternately recognize objects, then mind, then
objects, then mind, etc.

The way you meditate has to change from grade to grade! Are you going to
spell words or read sentences the same way in high school as you did in
elementary school? Will you still be reading the same way in college?
Will graduate school reading be the same as college reading? The way you
look at words must necessarily change. Likewise, the way you meditate
progresses to match the strength of wisdom in the mind. There's no need
to go around noting each object by spelling out "c-a-t" but just
recognize the word "c-a-t" as "cat".

Right now I see yogis come to retreat the first time and they begin with
an object. The next time they come to retreat, they begin back at an
object. Is there a need to go back to this level when you can see the
object, the feeling mind, the knowing mind, all working together?
(Yogis: "We're not there yet.") Do you know why you are not there? There
needs to be continuity and momentum in awareness. Because there's no
continuity of awareness, there's no momentum and wisdom is not growing.
It's the work of the mind that knows object as object, mind as mind, and
how they're working. When this wisdom is stronger, it doesn't meditate
in the same way it did before. It understands in the one instance that
it sees.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My teacher used to say that we don't label experiences or objects with
characteristics but that characteristics become clear in the mind. If we
think about characteristics, then we follow the objects around and
think, "This is anicca," "this is dukkha" or "this is anatta". People
want to attribute anicca, dukkha, or anatta characteristics to their
little bits of experience. In reality, the characteristics of existence
are **anicca, dukkha, anatta ñāṇas** that become crystal clear to the
mind in an instance of clear seeing when conditions are ripe and no one
can dispute that wisdom. These ñāṇas don't come about through a thinking
process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Really, "I" is just an idea, a belief. You need to hear about it but
realize it for yourself. As you experience it, this understanding will
open up to you. I can't tell you a lot about it beforehand. I can only
tell you when you experience it. Then you understand and it becomes
clear but before then, It's still very intellectual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yogis say that the mind wanders outside, or that their thoughts drift
towards home and family while they're at the center. The mind doesn't
have the nature of "wandering outside," "coming here," or "going home".
In reality, thoughts and memories of home just arise in the mind and
they also just pass away. You need to have this right way of seeing the
mind from the beginning. The mind does not "go out" or "wander about".

If you have the notion that the mind wanders around or goes out, then
you also need to use a lot of energy to "bring it back in". That's
tiring! The underlying wrong belief that you have to "bring back" the
mind that has "gone out" also characterizes the mind as a permanent
entity, which it is not. The mind only has the nature of arising or
happening. The right way to view the mind is to see that the thoughts
are just arising of their own nature. Only through realizing with right
view that the mind just arises, arises, and arises will wisdom begin to
understand the nature of impermanence (anicca).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Experiencing arising and passing away is very different from
understanding arising and passing away. A person may experience arising
and passing away many, many times before realizing anything. What we
want is understanding and wisdom. Yogis tend to follow their experiences
upon others' advice and immediately think, "I've seen anicca." That kind
of thought (with incomplete wisdom) ends the path right there, making it
difficult for other realizations to follow. Can there be real
understanding then?

Note that defilements can also see passing away. For example, a lobha
mind can see passing away while eating and in effect, wants to eat even
more! So can we say that it is "anicca" every time we see arising and
passing away? Just now, I showed you how lobha can also see passing
away.

Please don't decide that you have understood the nature of arising and
passing away after you've only seen a little bit. That mental
confirmation that you've understood closes the mind off from seeing
more. True understanding will arise when the mind is ready, after many,
many experiences. Your responsibility is to cultivate awareness and
right view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In reality, the same experience doesn't happen over and over again. An
experience happens only once, in this moment. You only think something
is a recurring experience because the mind adds up memories of past
experiences to this experience. These are all concepts at work
(paññatti). Ultimate reality (paramatta) is always new. An experience
arises only once, in this present moment. Your work is to know an
experience whenever it arises.

For example, can you tolerate it if one mosquito bites you once? Yes.
What if two mosquitoes bite you? No, you can't take it anymore! That's
because you're now thinking, "Oh, there are a lot of mosquitoes!" "A
lot" or "a long time" are all concepts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is more important than an experience is your understanding of that
experience. Only people who investigate can realize this. You begin with
questions like: What is this? What is happening? Why is it happening?

Can there be understanding without this kind of investigative wisdom?
Vipassanā is a meditation that invests in intelligence and wisdom to
develop more wisdom. What is object and what is mind? Do you know this
very clearly? You need to recognize this while you are practicing. These
are the types of things you want to ask, investigate and study with an
open, inquiring mind.

Your understanding will be even clearer when you practice dhamma
investigation when the mind is calm. Are you just going to be aware of
one object? How many objects can you be aware of in one moment? Aren't
objects arising at the six sense doors? Try investigating.

If you are only aware of what is happening at the nostrils to the
exclusion of everything else, can you say you are fully in the present
moment? You can only consider yourself as being truly in the present
moment when you are aware of the nāma-rūpa in that moment. Can you say
that you are aware when you catch one, but miss the other 99? Think
about it. Only when you become aware of many things and processes can
you say you are aware.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

People say that it is tough to maintain awareness. Actually it is not
that difficult to have or to maintain awareness. People only think It's
difficult when they don't have awareness of their preferred object.

You can have awareness with any object that arises. The object is not
important. It is more important that there is awareness in the mind and
that you learn how to maintain it. So how do you help awareness grow?
You do this by:

- Becoming skillful in the practice,
- Knowing how to maintain the practice, and
- Knowing how to grow in meditation.

These are the marks of wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There will always be contact with objects, but defilements won't have a
chance to arise when awareness, stability of mind, and wisdom are
strong. Your work is to be diligent in strengthening these spiritual
faculties of awareness, stability of mind, and wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Are you yearning for the Dhamma? Or do you want to learn how to practice
meditation? Lobha just wants Dhamma as an end result. Skillfulness and
right practice however, will grow confidence, faith, and wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You want Dhamma but you don't get Dhamma. Why? It's because what you are
actually doing is off the mark. Something is missing or lacking in the
practice and It's not complete. The wisdom that understands how to
practice skillfully is still fragile. When the type of wisdom that knows
how to practice skillfully is complete, then other insights into Dhamma
will naturally follow.

If you are putting work into your practice but find that you are not
seeing corresponding benefits to what you've put in, ask questions,
investigate, study what is happening, and have discussions with
knowledgeable teachers. These are ways to become skillful in meditation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some yogis have told me that their samādhi vanished when they yawned,
swallowed some saliva, or shifted around. What kind of samādhi is this?
It can't be considered stability of mind if it can be so easily
disturbed. It's the kind of shaky samādhi which only arises when
experiences are favorable.

A strong, stable, and continuous samādhi develops for someone who has
natural awareness of whatever experience that arises or for someone who
sees everything as something to be aware of, with wisdom. The mind will
do its own work whether awareness is there or not there. Without
awareness, the mind will follow orders from defilements. With right
awareness, the mind will do the work of wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A yogi recounted that she thought she was aware while eating only to
realize after the meal that she had been eating with greed!

Think about it: How could she have thought that there was awareness when
there wasn't? What was happening in the mind? It is because she was not
regularly checking what was happening in the mind, but only paying
attention to the eating process. It's also because she wasn't paying
attention to the meditating mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One yogi said, "When I noticed other yogis eating without mindfulness
and with greed, I became more mindful. My mindfulness increased."

A wise person will take advantage of an experience to develop sati,
samādhi, and paññā. Someone without wisdom will just react to the same
situation with aversion.

Our understanding of the Dhamma will grow when we use awareness+wisdom
whenever we see, hear, or come into contact with something. It is most
important that awareness+wisdom are always prepared and ready for any
situation. It's our responsibility to take care of and develop the mind
that is able to discern the dhamma nature that is present all the time,
everywhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

How do you sleep? Here, I'm not asking whether you sleep on your
stomach, side, or back. I'm asking about your mind. Do you just let go
of everything when you fall asleep? Are you thinking? Are you aware? I
sometimes like to ask yogis what my teacher used to ask me, "What is the
last thing you were aware of before you fell asleep?" Or, "What were you
aware of as soon as you woke up?" This is meant to show you how you
should be practicing: Up to the moment you fall asleep and beginning
again as soon as you wake up. It means that except for when you're
asleep, every moment is a time for meditation.

When you wake up, do you realize that you are awake? When do you first
realize that you are awake? Do you really know at that time? Of course,
yogis wake up, but they don't realize that they've woken up. Many people
will just start to do things around the room without realizing that
they're awake. Sati has not come in yet. Some people may realize that
they're awake, but forget again. They only become aware once again when
they arrive at the Dhamma Hall!

So here's a suggestion: As soon as you wake up, don't start doing things
just yet. Sayadaw U Jotika gave this idea to consciously breathe in for
four or five minutes when waking up. The mind will become more alert.
Make sure not to do it too softly or else you might fall asleep again!
Then, with awareness, get up, walk, or do what you need to do. Whatever
you are aware of is ok so long as there is awareness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Awareness becoming continuous isn't like winning the lottery by chance.
There are causes and conditions for this to happen. If you find that the
momentum of awareness is no longer there, first accept: Everything is
nature and this isn't just happening to you. Then check the causes.
After many experiences of momentum going up and down, you will begin to
see conditions in the mind that make awareness more continuous and
conditions that'll break momentum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

People only become awake and alert when there is some sort of discomfort
or distress. They stop paying attention once they are comfortable again.
Unfortunately, we can't just start practicing only when something goes
wrong. That is why the Buddha left us with many notes on heedfulness and
diligence (appamāda).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Buddha didn't urge us to be practicing all the time for nothing.
It's because he knew about the full extent of moha that he left us this
instruction. Just try stopping. Try to stop meditation for a while and
you'll see the strength of defilements.

If this side of wisdom stops, a party of defilements will just come in
and cover everything. That's what I mean by not being able to pause.
That's why I also say, "Never give up." Either there is momentum on the
wisdom side or there will be momentum on the defilement side. If you
were to let go of this wisdom momentum even for a bit, it will take
quite a lot to begin again. Beginning again is not that easy. That's why
you can't let it stop. Imagine going all the way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Do you experience happiness and joyful interest when you are observing
with awareness+wisdom?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we are practicing Dhamma every time we are practicing, there is
mental and bodily happiness. Insights can't arise in a mind meditating
with mental or bodily discontent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One yogi became really impressed by what she was able to see in just 15
minutes of continuous awareness. Most people are swimming or lost in
thought most of the time but it is really amazing what we can discover
in just 15--20 minutes of continuous awareness. Try it for yourself and
see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You want to listen to my Dhamma talk but you don't want to hear the
birds chirping in the Dhamma Hall. You think, "Wow, they're so loud!"
This talk is one sound and the birds are another sound. Someone with the
right information will use any of these objects to develop sati,
samādhi, and paññā in meditation. Another person without this kind of
information will only grow in defilements because of these sounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Instead of trying to figure out where sounds are coming from,
acknowledge these sounds as objects. When you are aware of these sounds
as objects, be aware of the mind that is knowing the sounds. What is
that awareness aware of? It is aware of objects. You can stay on the
side of awareness or see both the object and the knowing mind together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When people are going through mental or physical pain, they don't take
interest or learn. They only want to escape the pain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you have pain while sitting, see the mind that wants to alleviate
this pain by shifting. Why is it reacting this way? When this reaction
lessens, how does the mind then view the object? You need to study the
mind's reaction to pain from different angles and observe the reactions
and all their manifestations: How are thoughts and feelings related or
what background ideas and underlying attitudes show up through thoughts?
If there's even the tiniest disliking to an object, the talking mind
will change its tone of voice in that way.

You can really get to know this talking mind. Without trying to stop
this talking or thinking, you can see the mind's internal dialogue from
morning until night. You are observing to understand the mind as it is,
not to make anything disappear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When wisdom raises its head a little, defilements just hammer it back
down. As soon as you figure out a little bit, the mind is already
chattering, "I know, I know." If you want to see the strength of this
conditioning, just look at the habit pattern of the mind to say, "I
know, I know." When wisdom understands something, the thought, "I know"
follows very closely behind. So how can you actually use that wisdom?

That's why I caution: Don't look down on defilements. We don't know just
how much they're at work! Wisdom will only have a chance by rising again
and again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Don't think too highly of yourself. Which takes place more frequently:
The times when there are understandings or realizations or the times
when there are no understandings or realizations?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Awareness does not find solutions. Only wisdom finds solutions. The work
of awareness is to know what is happening; this alone can't stop strong
defilements; only wisdom is able to do that work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Moha leaves the door open and all the defilements just walk through.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When the mind is either liking or disliking a certain object, it can no
longer see the object as it is or as dhamma. When the mind is motivated
by greed, then the object becomes an object of greed. When the mind is
motivated by anger or aversion, the object becomes an object of anger or
aversion. The mind can't observe or continue to be aware of this object
as it is.

It's like wearing blue tinted glasses whereby anything we look at
through these glasses will be colored blue. As such, we can't see the
natural characteristics of what we are looking at. That's why we need to
first check our glasses or check how we are observing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dissatisfied with what someone was doing, one yogi asked, "Why does he
do something this way?" More important is to recognize why this yogi
would ask such questions in the first place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There can be an understanding of anger or aversion as an object. With
dhammānupassanā and cittānupassanā, whatever is being observed (anger,
for example) is the object. When we say that there should not be
defilements in the mind, we mean that there shouldn't be defilements in
the observing mind. There is no way to stop defilements from happening
in the mind of a worldling (puthujjana) or one who has not yet
experienced any of the stages of enlightenment.

But the observing mind can be skillful and free of defilements when it
knows how to observe. With right attitude and without defilements in the
observing mind, the mind is calm and cool. Wisdom then has a chance to
open up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You need to understand anger deeply. In order to do that, you need to
build up sati, samādhi, and paññā and to watch and learn, every time
anger arises. You want to know the nature of anger and everything
related to this phenomenon. What happens in the body and what happens in
the mind when this defilement arises? What kinds of thoughts come up?
What is the nature of anger?

You (the mind) are an independent observer, studying this anger from the
side, as it is happening with the view that this is also dhamma nature,
not your anger or that you are angry. What are the different
characteristics of anger? How does it work? What happens in the mind?
How does an anger-motivated mind think? You study and learn every single
time, down to the smallest detail. There is no way for the defilement to
intensify if you observe it every time it arises. It can't rear its
head.

The bigger episodes will be quite rough, of course, and you may not be
able to recognize subtle forms of anger in the beginning. Only when the
mind has also strengthened with sati, samādhi, and paññā built up will
you be able to see anger from the beginning, as soon as it arises. You
can say you understand the nature of anger when you understand the whole
process of anger from beginning to end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We need to thoroughly understand how much defilements are torturing and
tormenting us. We haven't learned this lesson fully yet. We don't learn
our lesson the first time, the second time, the third time... When
defilements arise, we just welcome them into our homes as guests,
serving them tea and biscuits. Isn't that true? Just reflect on all the
things we think about that fuel anger. We'll only turn for help from
wholesome qualities when we can no longer stand these defilements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We like to feed defilements to make them stronger whenever they arise.
We don't want heat, but we pour gasoline on a fire! We're supposed to
throw on water but we only have this little water gun children use
during the Water Festival.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Without enough wisdom, people try to suppress defilements with samādhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are two means by which defilements go:

> 1\) You become aware of a defilement and it goes away, or\
> 2) an understanding arises about the defilement.

When you become aware of a defilement as an object, it dissipates from
the strength of awareness. Alternatively, there is a realization about
the defilement and it disappears, similar to light replacing darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are latent, deeply embedded underlying ideas that will only
surface when you come in contact with different experiences. When faced
with that experience, the mind starts talking, motivated by certain
background ideas. Only deep understanding will get to the level of these
long-held ideas. If these ideas have been held really vigorously before,
the present level of understanding and wisdom may comprehend the
situation but is not sufficient to really let go of the idea itself.

When something happens, what is more powerful: Defilements or wisdom?
Defilements that have come in unconsciously are quite potent and often
invisible, having gone deep into the mind. How powerful is something
with that pull and that has been inside for that long?

I asked this question at a retreat in Singapore: "So now that you are
talking Dhamma, how much greed do you have?" The yogis checked their
minds and found that there wasn't anything they wanted in that moment. I
suggested that something was there and yet it was so powerful that they
couldn't see it.

What kind of craving was I talking about? It's the craving for
everything to go smoothly on retreat and elsewhere. Is it possible to
see that kind of lobha? They were very surprised! There would have been
conflicts had we stopped the discussion at that moment.

The type of pull that has been with us for a lifetime is extremely
strong, buried in the unconscious and no longer at surface level. Called
anusaya, such defilements only appear under varying circumstances and
vipassanā ñāṇa alone can't access this deep level. Only a very powerful
magga-ñāṇa is able to handle this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What do I mean when I say you need to be "collecting data"? It means you
are observing what is happening every time it happens. There are various
ways that aversion can play out. If you have awareness every single time
that there is this experience and you wait patiently and observe, you
are collecting data. A defilement like aversion can be very strong
sometimes, while feeble at other times. Why is that? You may not know
the answer until your data is complete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Do you think something is "good" or "bad"? Or do you have a real
understanding that something is good or bad? Real understanding rejects
what you once perceived as good or bad and just sees it as it is.
Understanding also removes wrong concepts about something.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a lot of delusion when people are healthy. People only begin to
pay attention when they get sick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not important for aches and pains (objects) to disappear. You want
to learn about the mind and body processes that arise and pass away in
the presence of these aches and pains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Instead of trying to stop drowsiness, you want to learn about the nature
of drowsiness. These are two different motivations. You may find that if
there's an aversion to this drowsiness, it'll slowly get stronger and
you may fall asleep. If however, you are interested in what is
happening, the mind will become alert once again.

There are some possible reasons (among others) for this drowsiness:

> 1\) You may have eaten too much and are sleepy,\
> 2) You are not interested in the meditation work you are doing and
> there's boredom,or\
> 3) It is a habit to fall asleep as soon as you close your eyes.

Be interested in whatever is happening!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yogis tend to tell me that something is "good" or "bad". Or they'll come
and ask me whether what happened to them was good. Please don't take an
experience as "good" or "bad". It's only good if you understand more
about the nature of what has happened, its causes and effects, whether
it was wholesome or unwholesome and the value of the experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please reflect on this: Is there any object worthy of greed or anger? Do
you truly recognize that craving, aversion, and delusion (and all their
relatives) are all unwholesome mental states? Have you really understood
that sati, samādhi, paññā, mettā, karuṇā, muditā, and upekkhā are
wholesome mental states? If you want to understand, please learn about
all these with awareness+wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kusala has the power to break down the akusala qualities in the mind and
vice versa. That is why you need to try to do everything that's
wholesome including using wholesome speech and doing things with a
wholesome motivation. But the highest, most meaningful action is doing
things with wisdom. When awareness+wisdom are present within an action,
the mind understands how to do things skillfully so that both sides will
benefit. Just seeing one side (i.e. let me have this, but not others, or
let me be successful) is the work of strong defilements. Wisdom is the
opposite, seeing the same thing moha would normally see, in a completely
different light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we only pay attention to objects, that is only half the picture and
understanding will be incomplete. Our field of awareness must expand to
include objects, the observing mind, feelings and more. This expanded
field of awareness comes about from waiting and watching with patience
and intelligence, not from focusing on objects in hopes of seeing
something. That is why this expanded awareness is so important.

Wisdom steps aside as a detached observer to the entire process that is
happening on its own. On the other hand, focusing as a way of observing
has more of a feeling of sticking to an object. So of course, the field
of awareness would be very narrow. That is why I remind you to neither
force nor focus.

We pay more attention to the observing mind than to objects. Is the mind
reacting with defilements over this object? We also pay special
attention to the meditating mind when the objects are defilements. Are
there also defilements in the meditating mind? In this world, there is
only mind and objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can no longer see the mind when there is too much focusing. Focusing
uses concepts like distance and place. What are you going to focus on
and where are you going to focus to see the mind? By focusing, you will
only see the object side. You can only observe the workings of the mind
if you are able to wait and watch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you open your eyes, do you recognize that there's seeing happening?
What is the difference between looking and seeing? Looking requires
directing attention to an external object but just seeing doesn't
require that kind of exertion.

Seeing is just seeing. Is seeing wholesome or unwholesome? It's neither!
However, unwholesome mental states have many opportunities to arise
without awareness+wisdom present in seeing. Meditation is about
cultivating right attitude and right attention and developing sati,
samādhi, and paññā with whatever is happening.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You need to become skillful at meditating with your eyes open if you
want to take this meditation into your daily life. This means becoming
skillful at practicing with and learning about any object you encounter.

The mind works in similar ways when It's looking and when It's
listening. It is just working through two different sense doors. Are you
aware that you are looking? The mind that is looking is looking. The
mind that is listening is listening. When looking or listening, the mind
has to pay attention to an object. If you know that you are looking,
there is awareness already and you can recognize the mind.

There are countless instances during the day when you are looking. How
many times have you noticed this throughout the day? Many defilements
arise in relation to eye sense objects every time you look without
awareness+wisdom. The fires of defilements are burning. You need to
learn how to practice while looking. You need to learn how to look with
awareness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the Buddha gave guidance on how to speak with
awareness+wisdom. We only have to consider the difficulties that have
arisen out of miscommunications with each other to appreciate skillful
talking. While beginning yogis are initially asked to refrain from
speaking, a longer-term yogi ought to learn to talk with
awareness+wisdom. We are developing this skill for our main places of
practice: the home, workplace, office, or business. No one will be
practicing at a meditation center her whole life but by learning how to
practice for outside, both the mundane affairs and meditation for the
supramundane can go hand-in-hand.

When talking, beginning with an awareness of any object is fine. With
further practice, you'll become aware of what is happening in the mind
as well as in the body. The mind is doing its own work of talking and
you just let that happen naturally. The awareness can see how the mind
is working. What is it thinking? What does the mind feel? What is it
paying attention to? It's crucial to be aware of the kind of mind you
are speaking with. Difficulties and suffering are a certainty in speech
motivated by defilements while situations work out smoothly when there
is wisdom.

So shouldn't you practice to have awareness+wisdom in speaking? Who is
talking? Is there a speaker? You can recognize the speaking process as
another mind and body process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You walk back to your room from the Dhamma Hall. When do you have the
intention to open the door? Some people have their keys ready in their
hands on the walkway, while others have it ready by the stairs. Do you
know you are going up the stairs? When you open the door, how much of
the door-opening process do you know? What are you hearing? Can you be
aware of what you are hearing if your attention is only on opening the
door? That's why I say you need this expansive awareness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some people spend lots of energy for their sitting meditation, only to
let go of everything (including awareness) when they get up. Momentum
dies right then and there!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What does it mean, without a break? This is the most important part of
this practice. How much are you aware of as you get up from sitting
meditation? When does the intention to get up arise? What else do you
know? Are you aware of your body turning? Do you know your body turning?
You move, shift, push off, get up, then what? Do you look around at
other people in the Dhamma Hall?

Please work to understand the value of a mind filled with awareness and
wisdom. What is the state of a mind that has this awareness+wisdom? What
is the state of mind that is awake and alert? Are you able to
distinguish different mental states?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A yogi reported, "I've been observing this painful sensation for over an
hour now and the pain increases but my meditation does not improve. I'm
going around in circles."

Right now this yogi is paying attention for an hour. If she is fully
aware that she is paying attention for one hour, wouldn't this yogi have
built up sati and samādhi in that time period? In this case, lobha looks
for a specific result, i.e., for this painful sensation to go away. When
things don't turn out as she had hoped or wanted, the yogi thinks that
she is not progressing in meditation. Can faith and confidence increase
with this way of thinking? Or will there be disappointment? This kind of
wrong thinking, considered wrong attitude, wrong frame of mind, wrong
attention (ayoniso manasikāra) is motivated by defilements in the
underlying ideas.

Alternatively, if this yogi viewed this one hour as one where sati,
samādhi, and paññā were developing, that becomes right attitude, right
frame of mind and right attention (yoniso manasikāra). This is how
confidence in oneself and faith in the practice grows.

Please consider the yogi's statement. How do we measure our progress in
meditation? The development of sati, samādhi, paññā, and an increase in
wholesome states of mind and a decrease in defilements is progress in
Dhamma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One yogi related that his sitting meditation was improving day by day
and so he wanted to sit more frequently for longer periods.

Why does this yogi think this way? Actually, what should happen is that
instead of wanting to sit more, the yogi should want to practice more
consistently and continuously in any posture. Instead the yogi connected
the "good" meditation to the sitting and so paid more attention to the
posture. It's difficult to recognize the mind at work when paying more
attention to the object and to what is happening.

Mistaken ideas regarding meditation come about from not being able to
see the workings of the observing mind. We may not recognize that the
pleasant feelings or what we may consider "good sittings" are all
effects resulting from their own causes and conditions (which we failed
to notice). Only the kind of wisdom that has an expansive, aerial,
birds-eye-view of both mind and objects happening together and their
processes is able to understand cause-and-effect relationships. Wisdom
further builds up and strengthens with each new understanding that
completes the picture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where there is a cause, there will be an effect. My teacher would always
ask about the causes. He always wanted to know the causes. I would go
and tell him about seeing the beginning, the middle, and end and rising
and falling. Sayadawgyi would then ask, "Why did it arise?" "Why did it
end?" I didn't know. (Laughs) I knew that there was rising and falling
but I didn't know why. What was arising? So how could I believe it? He
just asked simply, "Why did it happen?" No one could answer. Everyone
was just looking for this arising and passing away and we were satisfied
with just arising and passing away.

Buddhism in brief is about understanding cause and effect. We must know
when sati is present and know when sati is absent. We need to know the
causes for sati to happen and how sati can be increased. Similarly, we
need to know when samādhi is present and to know when samādhi is absent.
We also need to know the causes that led to the increase in samādhi. I
will also add one more thing: We need to also know why we lose samādhi.

It is the same with defilements. We have to know when defilements are
present, when they're absent, when they come in or intensify and when
they go down in intensity. Why did they go down in intensity?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It has been some time that you've been observing this mind and body. How
much more do you understand now? How deep is this understanding?

A fellow yogi observes objects. I also observe objects. Can we have the
same levels of understanding of these experiences? Is it possible for
someone who has just started practicing to have the same level of
understanding as someone who has been practicing for a long time (in the
right way)?

The practice has stalled if the current level of understanding is about
the same as the previous level of understanding. Knowing and wisdom
should not stand still but always be advancing. As much as knowing and
understanding increase, so too does one's skill in the practice of
meditation. This means the meditation is thriving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you see thoughts like, "Oh my meditation is not improving," please
check the attitude in the mind. These thoughts can come up if you have
been paying more attention to what is happening (objects) without
recognizing the wanting and expectations working in the background. See:

- Is it because you haven't achieved what you expected to achieve?
- Is it because you are not getting what you wanted?
- Do you see that you are getting as much as you are practicing?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are very few people who recognize that it is also a part of
meditation when they ease up the mind that was tight or constricted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Are you practicing in a certain place because you think It's good for
meditation? Or are you practicing because you realize that this is
wholesome, because you understand the value of this practice? Please
first work to appreciate the goodness and value inherent in this
practice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

How much more do you know about the processes and objects you've been
watching for so many years now? How much do you know about objects? This
understanding is important and there needs to be a curiosity, a
willingness to explore, to learn, and to understand. You get to taste
food at every single meal. How much more do you understand now about
taste?

Reflect on these things as you practice daily. The seeing, hearing,
tasting, smelling, touching, and thinking are all experiences and mind.
You know when there is happiness and you know when there is sadness. How
much more do you understand about these mental states now than before?
In comparison, how different are the levels of defilements when the mind
comes in contact with objects now?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you reflect on Dhamma, reflect on things relevant to your
experience of Dhamma. You'll need awareness to know what is happening
and you'll also be more in the present moment instead of lost in
thoughts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can't force the Dhamma to come to you. You need to be patient, but
never forget the practice---that is what it means to help the Buddha's
Dispensation (sasana).

### DHAMMA IN THE MORNINGS I {#Section0016.xhtml_dhammainthemorningsi}

The following are translations of two of Ashin Tejaniya's morning Dhamma
reminders given at the Shwe Oo Min Meditation Center. The talks have
been edited and organized into related sections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### DAY I {#Section0016.xhtml_dayi}

#### The Meditating Mind {#Section0016.xhtml_themeditatingmind}

Keep your mind as calm and as relaxed as possible, not too tense or too
lax. Don't be too anxious about your practice. The mind needs to be able
to adjust accordingly, walking the middle road between too much and too
little effort, neither overzealous nor disinterested. The wise mind
makes adjustments as needed during meditation.

Sometimes, even with all this fine-tuning, there might still be craving
(lobha). You may also find that you are feeling drowsy even with faith
and confidence (saddhā) in the mind. The mind may still be weak due to
defilements or there may be a great deal of wanting and expectations in
the mind. So be calm and relaxed.

> *Rather than thinking, "I'm practicing; I'm putting in effort," be
> satisfied with knowing what is happening, "I will work just to know."*

What can you know? It's very simple. You can only know as much as the
momentum that you have will allow. The mind that is meditating should be
relaxed, calm, and natural. There is no need to put in too much energy
or to focus in on something. Take the view that everything happening in
the mind and body is happening according to nature. This is all dhamma
nature at work.

#### Curiosity And Interest {#Section0016.xhtml_curiosityandinterest}

Have the mindset that you will not desire experiences, including not
wanting something to happen. You just do what needs to be done and let
whatever happens, happen. However, if there is no wholesome desire to
practice, nothing happens and if there is too much wanting for
something, it doesn't work either. So what should you do? What is too
much and what is too little? The mind just needs to be interested.
Attentive curiosity and interest are important. You can't make anything
arise or disappear through craving or aversion, so be aware of whatever
is happening. Try not to forget what is happening. Remember that having
expectations indicates there is some greed in the mind. Be aware of all
the arising, all the passing away. Work very simply and remind yourself
to be aware. If you see, just be aware that you are seeing. That is
enough.

> *Let whatever happens happen. The things that are happening are just
> nature.*

Remind yourself that they have nothing to do with you. Those who
understand natural laws can understand their principles. Understanding
natural laws very clearly is wisdom; he who understands these laws
understands nature.

Do you want to know? Please check yourself. The fact that you all came
to practice means that you do want to know. You are meditating here
because you wish to know the truth, to discover reality. Your key reason
for being at the center is to give yourself the time to become aware of
the mind and body. To see the connections and relationships between the
mind and body and making a habit of seeing these connections is what you
have come here to practice. The mind gets energized through this
wholesome desire for learning and the wish to understand.

Keep it simple! It's good if there is knowing; It's not good if there is
no knowing. There is a Burmese saying: "Ignorance is worse than being
deprived." But far worse than being ignorant is not wanting to know!

#### Wait And Watch {#Section0016.xhtml_waitandwatch}

What is happening in the body? There are the six sense doors. Five
involve the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue and the body. The sixth
is the mind. Therefore there are six kinds of objects arising at the six
sense doors. Sights are objects of knowing and sounds are objects of
knowing.

> *Seeing and hearing are not happening externally. They are happening
> inside.*

Objects are just objects; they are neither good nor bad. Nature is just
nature. An object is something that is to be known by the mind. Sound is
an object. Silence is also an object. You are aware of it because its
nature is to be known.

> *A thought is an object to be known just as the absence of thoughts is
> an object to be known. What is the difference?*

Is it good to have many thoughts? Is it bad? Is it good to have no
thoughts? Is that bad? Having many thoughts or having few thoughts is
neither good nor bad. Objects are just objects. If you consider them to
be positive or negative, that will then be followed by likes and
dislikes. That is when you get confused in your practice.

You don't need to look for or pursue objects. It's more helpful to just
wait and watch. The mind sees whatever that arises. When you see, you
see; when you know, you know. A yogi who practices by following objects
often asks what to note next. The yogi may ask, "What else should I look
for?" Alternatively, a yogi who practices by waiting and watching does
not follow objects. The yogi who waits and watches uses intelligence.

Your practice needs to have the right attitude, with balanced effort,
every time the mind comes in contact with objects. If the attitude is
not yet right attitude, then It's necessary to work on it. How can you
view objects? See that everything that is happening is all dhamma nature
and that all objects follow the laws of nature.

Sights and sounds are always happening. Because the mind and object
arise according to their nature, sights and sounds happen. You don't
hear something because you want to hear. You don't see something because
you want to see.

> *Do not think that these sensory experiences are happening because you
> wanted them. There is nothing happening due to your desire; everything
> happens due to cause and effect.*

Observe how the mind and objects interact. Are you aware only of what
you want to be aware of, or of what is happening right now? Do you only
observe what the mind is attracted to? Things happen according to their
nature and awareness just waits and watches.

You will see things as they are if there is no greed (lobha), aversion
(dosa), or delusion (moha) in the mind. Lobha is always searching for
something to like. Is there really something to be desired within the
object itself? Or does the nature of liking desire this object? Lobha's
nature is to like, grasp, and cling. You only think you like this object
because of lobha's nature of liking and moha's nature to obscure an
object's true characteristics. Delusion further confuses the mind into
desiring more of the object. There's no stopping this cycle of suffering
(saṃsāra).

There is nothing to be liked about an object. There is also nothing that
you get just because you like it. You only get things when the
conditions are ripe for you to get them. Whatever is happening is due to
nature; you just wait and watch this process objectively. If craving is
absent, you will just see what is to be seen. There is nothing
attractive about what is happening. There only needs to be knowing.

#### Lobha Is Sticky Like Glue {#Section0016.xhtml_lobhaisstickylikeglue}

> *Lobha is always present. Lobha's nature is wanting or craving and its
> nature is to exaggerate things. It is very sticky like glue; it
> doesn't let go or release. It never feels satisfied or contented
> because it thinks there is too little, there is never enough.*

As a yogi you can see how lobha comes in and creates trouble in the
practice. Just try to pay attention to this. As long as you don't
understand the way lobha works and its different tricks, you will be at
its mercy. Lobha is craving; it always wants more. When you notice
lobha, study it intently. How are you meditating under lobha's
influence? How does lobha think? You can't fully understand lobha
through second-hand knowledge. Only through your very own experience of
lobha in all of its workings, in all of its aspects will you really
understand lobha.

To be contented is wholesome; to be discontented is lobha. If you are
contented with the results of your practice, when you understand that
you get as much as you put into the practice, then you have samādhi. It
is lobha that isn't satisfied with the results of the practice. You are
practicing as much as possible and you'll get that much back in return.
Be contented with that. You will do as much as you can and be satisfied
with what you get.

#### Understanding The Noble Truth Of Dukkha {#Section0016.xhtml_understandingthenobletruthofdukkha}

Vipassanā samādhi develops out of continuous awareness, along with right
view and right attitude. Samādhi arises and there is peace when there is
continuous awareness, with the right attitude and right view. What is
unique about this? Should there be desire for a peaceful mind state?
Should there be aversion to agitation? When there is a cause, there is
an effect. Because there are conditions for contact, there is contact.

There is craving for comfort and happiness. There is also aversion to
agitation and unhappiness. Happiness and discomfort are just feelings.
The experience is only to be experienced; the object is only an object.
Whether good or bad, feelings are just feelings. Wisdom recognizes this
and releases the grip of lobha that desires good experiences.

Only when the mind does not perceive experiences as pleasing will it
understand the Noble Truth of dukkha. As long as the mind perceives
experiences as pleasing, then the Noble Truth of dukkha is still far
from being understood.

People think that they see the truth of dukkha only when they experience
suffering. If that is so, how can they understand that experiencing calm
(samādhi), the moments of bliss or delight (pīti), or of tranquility
(passaddhi), are also dukkha? So long as moha is present and considers
any of these experiences as pleasing, the Noble Truth of dukkha can't be
understood yet. Because people listen with defilements when they hear
about the Noble Truth of dukkha, they think it is about experiencing
bodily or mental suffering. In fact, that is dosa at work.

Whatever is happening is dukkha. Don't look at what is happening with
aversion or you will become depressed. The Noble Truth of dukkha is
discerned by the wise mind and is totally opposite to the kind of dukkha
one feels. The understanding of the truth of dukkha is wisdom. The mind
feels strength, energy, freedom, and detachment with this understanding.
The mind is devoid of craving and defilements. Whereas the experience of
dukkha is exhausting, the true realization of dukkha is free from
attachment and free of defilements.

#### Wisdom Has No Preference {#Section0016.xhtml_wisdomhasnopreference}

As you continue to practice, observe when awareness is present and when
awareness is absent, when wisdom is present and when wisdom is absent.
Wisdom naturally understands what is beneficial and what is not
beneficial. You are practicing to learn to watch the mind and body.
Insights will grow according to your understanding and what you can
know. What is more beneficial: To have awareness or to lack awareness,
to develop wisdom or not develop wisdom? You can investigate and analyze
this for yourself.

However much we plead for a blind person to see, he will not be able to
see. Likewise, no matter how often we ask a person to see ultimate
reality (paramattha), he will not understand its principles when there
is no wisdom. Only the wise, discerning mind can understand the nature
of paramattha.

> *Wisdom has no preference to see one thing over another.*

Without the desire to see specific things, all you have to do is keep
your eyes open and you can be aware. It is obvious; you know that you
are seeing. The desire to see specific things or experiences stems from
lobha. Wisdom can't arise when the mind is filled with lobha. When you
observe with lobha, only more lobha will arise. However, it is wisdom
that recognizes when lobha has arisen in the mind.

Vipassanā wisdom can't be comprehended simply through intellectual
thinking. The ordinary mind can't bring about insight through
intellectual thinking. Vipassanā insight is not something that can be
conceptualized through images; it is a wholly new understanding and
insight of principles or nature.

It is kusala if wholesome states of mind are continuously followed by
wholesome states of mind. Samādhi doesn't develop if wholesome states
are followed by unwholesome states. There is samādhi when the previous
mind is wholesome, if the present mind is wholesome, if this is followed
by wholesome mental states, and there is continuity in awareness. The
absence of sati, samādhi, and paññā is what gives defilements
opportunities to arise.

> *Whatever kind of work that involves defilements will one day grow old
> and dull. On the contrary, the work of knowing is never dull.*

Knowing with wisdom, knowing reality, does not have the characteristic
of becoming uninteresting or monotonous. It is always new and fresh. You
don't get tired of knowing, as knowing is never finished. It never gets
boring. You need to be happy with the work you are doing, to have
interest in it. This work is for life.

When the mind sees again what is already familiar, the knowledge only
becomes clearer. Wisdom deepens and you become more attentive and
energized. Your understanding and field of comprehension expand. There
is no end to knowing, as it is never complete. There should be no such
thing as "I know," because it is never enough. You start to see things
from multiple angles: You see two sides, mundane world and ultimate
reality, mind and object, cause and effect.

#### This Practice Is For Always {#Section0016.xhtml_thispracticeisforalways}

Remember that practice is not done only through sitting. It is not only
when you sit to meditate that there is awareness. The awareness must be
present at all times, in all activities. Once you have a right attitude
of balanced effort without expectations, try to be continuously aware.
Only then will momentum develop. It is important to learn to be aware
for longer and longer periods so that you can use this momentum outside.

> *You are not exerting so much energy or yearning for something.
> Neither the mind nor the body should become tired. There's no need to
> focus. Work with balance, calm, and continuity.*

The most important aspect of meditation is the meditating mind;
awareness must always be present. Observe whether the mind is working or
not. Keep checking the mind to see whether awareness is present. What is
the mind aware of?

It is important to practice with care, respect, and interest and
practice as much as you can. You've come this far and you will get as
much as you put in. Be satisfied with the sati and samādhi that develop.
Finally, remember to practice consistently throughout the day, all the
time, with a balanced mind and right effort.

#### DAY II {#Section0016.xhtml_dayii}

The meditating mind must be a Dhamma mind. Be calm, comfortable and
relaxed, with peace, faith, and intelligence. That is how you should be
practicing.

Wisdom is there when there is right awareness. However, if the awareness
is too focused, there's no chance for wisdom to come in. That is why we
don't force, focus, control, or restrict. We don't try to make anything
disappear. We are just aware of all that is happening and all that is
passing away. There are no expectations or discontentment.

Do not forget. Be aware. Keeping that in mind, you have to keep checking
the mind. What is the mind doing? Is it aware? Does it know? What does
it know? How much can it know? There needs to be an alertness to knowing
objects. This means knowing when hearing happens, when contact happens.
The mind is alert when the mind knows objects as contact happens.

There is the Dhamma we must have and there is the dhamma we must know.
When we refer to the Dhamma we must have, we mean the five spiritual
faculties of sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā, and paññā. The dhamma we
must know is what is happening in the mind and body. Meditation is the
practice of cultivating and developing the Dhamma that we don't already
have, to come to know what we don't already know.

#### Cultivating Wholesome Qualities {#Section0016.xhtml_cultivatingwholesomequalities}

We meditate to develop the sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā, and paññā that
are not yet present in the mind. The stronger these five spiritual
faculties become, the weaker the defilements become.

> *When sati is present, defilements become weak.\
> When samādhi is present, defilements become weak.\
> When viriya is present, defilements become weak.\
> When saddhā is present, defilements become weak.\
> When paññā is present, defilements become weak.*

What is important is that we meditate to nurture and cultivate these
currently weak, wholesome mental qualities so that they can grow
stronger and stronger. Mindfulness meditation is not about seeking
unique experiences. Wisdom does not have the desire for specific things
to happen.

Saddhā and viriya have the wish to keep up the practice. Viriya is the
wish to practice continuously and with perseverance. Saddhā wants to
continue meditation because it knows the value of the practice. Merely
focusing on results is the work of lobha. If you are pleased that you
see the object you wanted to see, that is the work of lobha.
Dissatisfaction with getting an object other than what you want to see
is dosa. These are both defilements!

#### All Objects Are Dhamma Nature {#Section0016.xhtml_allobjectsaredhammanature}

All objects are dhamma nature, dhamma phenomena. You can't hold onto any
object with lobha. Don't perceive any objects or experiences as good or
bad as no object or experience is better than any other experience or
object. Objects are just objects. They are to be known. That is all.

Don't go looking for objects or experiences that you may think are good.
The search for good experiences is coming at the bidding of lobha. You
are not meditating to get good experiences. If there's thinking right
now or you are feeling heat, just know what is happening. What are they?
All are just phenomena or objects.

> *The work of meditation is not to develop objects which are just
> happening through their own causes; the work of meditation is to
> cultivate the five spiritual faculties of sati, samādhi, viriya,
> saddhā, and paññā.*

#### Enjoying The Practice {#Section0016.xhtml_enjoyingthepractice}

Is it better to delight in a "good sitting" or better to have awareness?
It is not about liking the results but about enjoying the practice
itself. You will continue to practice on your own when you are
interested in and happy to practice and when you are invigorated by the
work you are doing. Only when you see and understand the effects of your
practice will you want to pay attention to becoming skillful in
fulfilling the causes and conditions. If the causes are good, the
effects will also be good. Let whatever is happening, happen but don't
forget the knowing. Investigate and learn.

#### Taste Of Dhamma {#Section0016.xhtml_tasteofdhamma}

Naturally, if there are wholesome mental states, there will be peace. It
is important that the meditating mind is a wholesome mind or working
towards wholesomeness. Sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā, and paññā are all
wholesome. Out of all the wholesome actions we can do (dāna, sīla,
samādhi, and paññā), cultivating wholesome mental qualities through
vipassanā bhāvanā (paññā) is the highest one.

Most people in this world like to enjoy the taste of good feelings or
sensations.

> *It is said that among all tastes, the best taste is the taste of
> Dhamma. The taste of Dhamma is not just a feeling of peace---it is the
> supreme taste of knowing and understanding.*

You need to taste the full flavors of Dhamma: Of knowing, of awareness,
and of understanding.

### DHAMMA IN THE MORNINGS II {#Section0017.xhtml_dhammainthemorningsii}

The following are transcribed selections of Ashin Tejaniya's English
morning Dhamma reminders recorded over a six-month period from October
2009 to March 2010. We've tried to keep Ashin Tejaniya's rhythm and
style of speaking intact while organizing the morning reminders into
discrete themes and eliminating some repetition in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Mindfulness Meditation Is A Learning Process {#Section0017.xhtml_mindfulnessmeditationisalearningprocess}

Meditation is about cultivating the good qualities of mind. We are just
trying to cultivate moment-to-moment, very simple. Don't forget what is
happening in you. If awareness is present, wisdom is also present and
the mind is free, liberated. It is free from the wrong view and free
from suffering.

Mindfulness meditation is a learning process, not a creative process.
So, we are not trying to do anything. We just wait and watch what is
happening as it is, not wanting, no expectations. We just practice
simply and continuously.

We are not trying to make something happen, to resist anything, or to
make anything disappear. We are not trying to create something. We are
in the present moment, just staying in the present moment by being
awake, knowing, and aware.

#### Checking The Attitude {#Section0017.xhtml_checkingtheattitude}

We check our attitude first before we meditate. What attitude, what
background ideas do you have when you meditate?

> *Do you want anything?\
> Do you expect anything?\
> Why are you meditating?\
> Why are you being mindful?*

We want to understand---that is why we are watching and learning. We are
not trying to control anything. We are not trying to create anything. We
simply want to be in the present moment: Awake, alert, aware.

Check your state of mind. Check your quality of awareness in the
observing mind. Is it tense or relaxed? What attitude do you have? Is
the attitude right or wrong? Very often you need to check your attitude.
When you are checking your mind, awareness is already present. Only
reminding and checking is enough. Just check your effort, energy and
quality of mind. How do you feel when you are mindful?

Wait and watch, very simply, with the right attitude. You don't want to
control the experience. You don't want to change the object or
experience. Whatever is happening is not your responsibility. Your
responsibility is right attitude and checking if awareness is present or
not and that it is moment-to-moment. Check, learn, and have interest.

#### Interest In The Activity Of The Mind {#Section0017.xhtml_interestintheactivityofthemind}

If the mind doesn't want anything, it is peaceful and relaxed. Think
about it as it is. Try to have interest in the activity of the mind. The
mind knows, the mind is paying attention and the mind feels.

The object is not very important. Don't go looking for it. Take care of
the quality of your mind. Check the quality of your mind---what
attitude, what idea, and what states of mind are there when you
meditate? Take care of your awareness and maintain your awareness. Don't
attach to anything. Don't resist anything.

So, how do you do this? If you don't have the right attitude or the
right idea, the mind will always attach to something or resist
something. The mind never rests. If you don't have wisdom you can't go
the middle-way. When you use wisdom, right attitude, right idea, and
right thought, the mind follows the middle-way. With equanimity and
understanding nature as it is there is no problem. At that time you can
learn more deeply.

Don't forget to think the right way, have the right information, right
idea, and right attitude. What are you doing now? What is the mind
doing? What is happening in the mind? Whatever is happening, everything
is okay, no problem. Let it be. Stay with the awareness. In the present
moment we are trying to be awake, alert, and interested. We are not
trying to go anywhere. We are not trying to get anything. We only need
to have right view, awareness, and interest.

> *Experience is happening and objects are happening all the time.
> Whatever is happening is not our responsibility---it is as it is.*

Our responsibility is to think the right way, to have the right
attitude, and to be aware continuously. Right thought is very important;
right attitude, right thought means perceiving everything as nature.
Object is object. Everything is nature. Nothing is a problem. We want to
know and we want to understand nature as it is.

Check your energy: How much energy do you use? If you use too much
energy, the mind becomes tense. Are you sure awareness is present? If
you can see awareness, awareness is surely present. We are not trying to
get something. Meditation is cultivation of awareness moment-to-moment.
We don't use too much energy, focusing, penetration, or concentration.
Just remember in the present moment. If you don't want anything, the
mind is very peaceful.

You can't get anything because you want it. Whatever you get is because
of conditions. Because the cause is fulfilled, the effect comes. Not
because you want it to. You need to pay attention to awareness, to the
meditating mind. In the present moment, is awareness present or not?
Don't follow the object. The object is not very important. The mind is
more important. You need to check what state of mind, what attitude you
have when you meditate. Check your energy: How much energy do you use?
Is the mind relaxed or not, tense or not? You don't need too much effort
to know the object. The mind naturally can know the object. Your
responsibility is to take care of your awareness. Is it present or not?

We are not trying to go anywhere. We don't expect anything. We are not
trying to create anything. We are being aware present moment by present
moment. The meditating mind must be simple. We are waiting. We wait and
watch, as it is, thinking about nature as nature. Nature is not ours,
not others', no body. Nature is no person, nobody. It's all a natural
process as there are causes and there are effects. The cause and effect
process and conditioning are nature. The mind is aware, the mind is
feeling, the mind is paying attention, and the mind is recognizing.
Everything is mind. Mind is working. Mind is happening. Nature is
happening, nature is working.

Why are you aware? Don't forget what you are doing, don't forget why you
are doing this. What is the state of your observing mind? You are
cultivating awareness and watching continuously. This is
moment-to-moment cultivation. The meditating mind must have the right
attitude. The practice must be done the right way. Experience is always
happening. What \[background\] idea do you have in your practice? What
state of mind are you watching it with? What point of view are you
looking at it with? When you are not expecting anything, when you don't
want anything, at that time, understanding can arise.

#### Understanding Objects As Objects {#Section0017.xhtml_understandingobjectsasobjects}

> *Any object or experience that appears should not disturb your
> practice. Objects are helping your awareness. You can use any object
> to grow sīla, samādhi, and paññā.*

If you have right attitude then everything is no problem and the object
does not disturb you. Any object is a dhamma object, dhamma nature. Even
pain can be an object. Pain is an object; no pain is also an object.
Object is object; if you understand object as object, the mind can't
attach and can't resist. The mind with no craving and no aversion has
samādhi.

Now, the sound of this machine is obvious \[the microphone is creating
feedback\]. Is this sound a problem? Think about it as it is. Dhamma
nature is arising, appearing. It becomes an object that the mind can
then know. You can be aware of this object and you can cultivate this
awareness, concentration, and wisdom. Use this object. If you have the
right attitude, you can cultivate awareness, concentration, and wisdom.

> *The object helps you to be aware, awake, and alert. Because of the
> object you can learn, you can be aware, and you can understand.*

In the present moment we just try to be awake and alert. With no
expectation, or greed, the mind is very peaceful and free. In the
present moment we need to be alert, awake, and ready. We are just trying
moment-to-moment to be awake. Because of wanting, because of desire, we
are not free. If we want something, if we are resistant, the mind is not
awake. Without expectation, without resisting, the mind is awakened.
Awakening means we know and understand what is happening. With
everything, any experience in the present moment, there is only mind,
objects, and awareness. We need to have the right attitude in the
awareness. Nature is nature, feeling is just feeling.

#### Are You Sure Awareness Is There? {#Section0017.xhtml_areyousureawarenessisthere}

The meaning of awareness is not forgetting. This means not forgetting to
think the right way, not forgetting to be aware, not forgetting the
right object. Awareness is not forgetting. Remembering and reminding is
awareness.

Are you sure awareness is present? Recognize when awareness is present.
If awareness is present then the object is already there. You don't need
to focus on the object. You just need to check if awareness is present
or not, whether awareness is continuous or not. Whatever is happening in
the mind and body is not your responsibility. Experience is experience.
The experience is not your responsibility.

> *Your responsibility is to have the right attitude and to be aware
> continuously. Check again and again, whether you have the right or
> wrong attitude. Reminding, checking, remembering---this is enough. You
> don't need to use too much energy to focus.*

How does the mind feel when it is aware? Relaxed or not, tense or not?
Check your mental state. The meditation mind must be relaxed, peaceful,
and interested. When you are meditating, whatever is happening, no
experience should disturb you. Everything is nature, dhamma, or object.
Whatever is happening is for learning. You are not looking for any
object. You are checking your quality of mind, the quality of the
watching mind. Do you have the right attitude or not? Is the mind
relaxed or not?

Check your quality of mind, the quality of awareness, how the mind is
working, if the meditating mind is interested, if awareness is present.
You are checking, reminding, and remembering moment-to-moment. If the
mind is stronger and stronger, the watching mind stronger and stronger,
it is doing its job. Your responsibility is only to maintain awareness,
moment-to- moment in a relaxed way and with interest.

#### Don't Follow The Object {#Section0017.xhtml_dontfollowtheobject}

You need to take care of awareness, not objects. If you are aware, some
object is already there. You are cultivating awareness continuously. You
don't do anything with the object. Stay with the awareness. It is more
important that you take care of your awareness, checking and continuing
like this, moment-to-moment. So simple! Whatever objects the mind is
knowing, let it be. The mind knows some object, the mind knows this
object or that object. You are waiting and watching how the mind is
working. Where is the mind? The mind is knowing, so continue to try to
be knowing continuously. Sometimes you can get stuck on one object. You
can know any object and you can know anything about an object. If the
mind slowly calms down and just checks, the mind can know anything.

> *How does the mind react to any experience?\
> Is the mind aware or not?\
> When you notice an object, how do you feel?\
> What do you think?*

Being continuously aware is very important. If you want continuous
awareness, you must see, you must know that awareness is present or not.
If you follow the object, awareness can't be continuous. If you check
that awareness is present, the object is already there. There is no need
to follow the object, no need to focus on the object. It's a waste of
time and energy and not necessary. If you notice your awareness is
present the object is already happening. You don't want to fixate on one
object. With any object, you just want to know that nature is happening.

The meditating mind is important. Knowing, being aware, the mind is
working, the mind is aware, the mind is watching. You must have right
attitude and right idea. Whatever is happening is experience. The
meaning is not important. Just recognizing the experience is okay. You
are aware of what is happening. Hearing is happening. You are not trying
to think about the meaning, you are trying to be aware of the
experience. Knowing you are hearing is enough. Before you are hearing,
before you are listening, awareness must be ready. If awareness is
continuous, awareness is always waiting and watching. Now you are
hearing the sound and silence, not only the sound, but the silence also.
Object is the experience, experience is the object.

We are not following any object. We let the object come. The object is
already there and the experience is always there. We are not trying to
follow the object, focus on the object. Why are we aware? Why are we
watching? We must have the right idea, right motivation, and right
knowledge. We want to understand and know the real nature of experience.
We want to understand. That's why we are learning and that's why we are
watching.

#### Vipassanā Samādhi {#Section0017.xhtml_vipassanasamadhi}

Samādhi comes from right attitude, right idea, and right knowledge. You
are not trying to do anything with craving. You are not trying to do
anything with aversion or delusion. You are aware in the present moment
with the right attitude. Whatever is happening in the mind and body is
just nature. If you think this way that nature is nature, feeling is
feeling, the mind is not reacting, liking or disliking. So the mind is
peaceful and stable.

Whatever is happening is not your responsibility. Your responsibility is
to try to think the right way and to try to be aware continuously. Right
view and right thought is very important. With right view and right
thought, samādhi is already there. Check in your mind: If there is no
craving, no aversion, and no reaction, this is also samādhi. This is
vipassanā samādhi and sammā-samādhi. Because of understanding, because
of right view, because of right thought, the mind is already calm,
peaceful and stable.

The meaning of samādhi is stability of mind, not focusing. Just ask
yourself how the mind is working, why the mind is working and if the
mind is relaxed. Check the quality of mind. With just checking, you
don't need too much energy to be mindful. If you have the right view,
right idea, and right thought then the mind is stable. When the mind is
calm and peaceful, this is samādhi. If there is no lobha, this is
samādhi. If there is no dosa, this is also samādhi. This is vipassanā
samādhi.

#### Expectations And Patience {#Section0017.xhtml_expectationsandpatience}

For any experience that appears, check to see whether you have a
reaction. Are you interested in being mindful? Are you interested in
practicing? Why are you aware? Your practice should be simple and
natural, with no expectation. You are not trying to gain something. You
are trying to be aware in the present moment. If your expectations are
high, the mind will not have any interest. It can't be satisfied with
what it already has. The mind becomes bored or disinterested.

> *If you understand in the present moment what you are doing and
> already getting, understand clearly, the mind can be satisfied or
> interested. Meditation is a learning process. You can't hurry.*

Meditation is recognizing what is happening. Sometimes expectations
arise but It's not a problem. The only thing you need to do is to
recognize that the expectation is there. Don't judge this expectation.
Meditation is not about trying to change anything or trying to control
anything. It is just recognizing what is happening. Don't complicate
things in the present moment. Be simple and just know. If you don't have
expectations (not wanting anything) the mind is already at peace.

#### Being Present {#Section0017.xhtml_beingpresent}

Stay with the peace in the present moment. Just be in the present
moment, stay in the present moment. The present moment is the only thing
that exists. Past does not exist and future does not exist either. Now,
stay in the present moment, peacefully. Just simply be aware in the
present moment; the mind is very peaceful not wanting anything. If
wanting or craving exists, your duty is just to recognize. No need to
judge what is happening.

> *When we meditate, there is no need to hurry.\
> We are not going anywhere.\
> We are staying in the present moment fully.*

If you can stay in the present moment you can be satisfied. Because of
knowing, you understand what is happening now, understand what is going
on in the present moment, this is real life. Whatever you put into the
practice you get in return. If you don't know what you are already
getting, you will want more. You get as much as you put in. If you can
stay fully in the present moment, expectations won't come. No need to
regret the past. No need to expect the future. You are trying to think
the right way. Thinking is very powerful. If your thinking is
reasonable, if your thinking is right, the mind is already calm, relaxed
and peaceful.

#### When The Mind Is Interested, Wisdom Is Working {#Section0017.xhtml_whenthemindisinterestedwisdomisworking}

Because of knowledge, because of wisdom, the mind is peaceful and stable
already. So that's why there's no need to use too much focusing. Check
the mind, what the mind is thinking and what the mind is knowing. Only
interest is necessary. When the mind is interested, wisdom is working.

When we are meditating and the mind thinks about the Dhamma, about
practice, nature, or object, this thinking makes our awareness stronger
and stronger, because of interest. The dhamma nature is more awake and
alert because of checking. If our minds are thinking \[these right
thoughts\] the mind can't be sleepy. Then we are thinking the right way.
We must both **think** about the practice **and practice**. We are not
blindly aware. Awareness alone is not enough. Awareness and wisdom come
together. If someone is aware continuously, naturally wisdom will
slowly, slowly grow.

> *Defilements do their job and wisdom also does its job. We already
> have intelligence. We use our knowledge, intelligence and effort to
> practice.*

When we don't have craving, aversion, worry or anxiety in the present
moment, the mind is free and peaceful because of knowledge, wisdom and
awareness. Do you understand this? It's not only about being mindful. We
are being aware, thinking, and recognizing.

We should be thinking about the practice. If we are thinking the right
way, the mind can't think the wrong way. We prevent delusion when we are
aware and when we understand. Knowing what is happening is also right
view. Whether it is good or bad, we know what is happening in the
present moment.

So, don't forget why you are doing this; don't forget why, for what,
with what motivation. Do you want to get something? Are you sure
awareness is present? If it is present, what do you understand?
Sometimes you need to use the questions of what, why, and how. But the
answer is not important. Interest is important. You only need interest.
You can't and you don't want to get results immediately.

#### The Benefits Of Awareness {#Section0017.xhtml_thebenefitsofawareness}

When you are aware continuously, how do you feel? In the present moment,
now, do you want anything? Do you have expectations? What are you doing?
If awareness is present in this moment, how do you feel? If awareness is
lost, what is different? Having awareness and not having awareness: How
is the mind different?

Do you understand the value of awareness? Stay with the awareness. All
objects come to awareness. What is the difference between having
awareness and not having awareness? There is a different quality of
mind. You need to understand the value of awareness. If you are aware,
how do you feel? When you are meditating, is the mind tense or not,
relaxed or not? When you are interested, wisdom is working. Because of
the object, you can be aware.

Continuity is very important, moment-to-moment and moment by moment. And
momentum, momentum is nature, nature is dhamma. Continuity of practice
becomes a habit; habit becomes nature. Habit becomes nature when the
practice gains momentum and the dhamma is working, nature is working,
"nobody" is meditating, and nobody is practicing. Nature is practice.
Momentum comes because of the cause and effect process.

> *Any time awareness is present, the mind is safe, secure, meaningful
> and alive. If we're not aware, we are lost, and we've lost meaning.*

We don't know what's happening in the present moment. We are blind and
we are deaf. Awareness and lack of awareness have two very different
qualities. If we have awareness with wisdom (depending on the wisdom
quality) awareness will be stronger. The value is also very different.

We need to understand that as much as we put into practice we get in
return. If we don't understand what we already have, we can't be
satisfied. If we have too many expectations, we don't know what we have.
If our expectations are too high, we can't be satisfied with what we
already have.

We need to appreciate what we are doing. We should understand the value
of what we are doing. What is the benefit of doing this? What is the
result if we don't do this? If we are not doing this, what is happening?
We are cultivating and growing these good qualities of mind, moment-to-
moment.

#### On Right Effort And Energy {#Section0017.xhtml_onrighteffortandenergy}

Check your energy and how much energy you use. You don't need too much
energy to know something, to be aware. If there's an expectation or if
you want something, the mind uses more energy. Check your state of mind.
Don't let the mind be tense or tired. The meditating mind must be
relaxed. Don't use too much energy to be focused.

We don't need to use too much energy to know the object. Naturally the
mind can know the object. We need to continually remind ourselves and
recognize the importance of staying in the present moment, moment by
moment.

We don't need to use too much effort or too much energy to be focused,
to be mindful. The nature of the mind can know the object naturally, so
we don't need to try to know the object. If the mind is relaxed, the
mind knows something about itself. The meaning of effort is to try to
continue, try to be patient, try to be relaxed. Effort is doing what we
should do and not doing what should not be done. Effort is also to try
to reduce defilements. Making awareness continuous is also effort.

#### On Right Practice {#Section0017.xhtml_onrightpractice}

Sometimes we sit and stop meditating; to stop meditating is wrong
meditation. Wrong attitude and wrong meditation is "stopping," meaning
right meditation is "starting". The mind can know, the mind has momentum
already, awareness all the time, it knows many things. If you have right
idea, right attitude, right thinking, the mind immediately calms down,
becomes peaceful. We stop the wrong practice, meaning we start the right
practice.

#### The Noble Eightfold Path {#Section0017.xhtml_thenobleeightfoldpath}

We are practicing the Noble Eightfold Path. In this moment we can hear.
The fact that we are aware that we are hearing is right view. We know
what is happening in the present moment. This is right view. This is
nature. This is experience. Object is object. Experience is experience.
There's no body, no person. If we have this attitude and we are aware of
what is happening, this is right view and right thought.

> *When we have right view and right thought, we can't speak wrongly, we
> can't act wrongly, and we can't live wrongly. This is right speech,
> right action, and right livelihood.*

Being aware is right action. Then we have right effort, right awareness,
and right samādhi. This is the Noble Eightfold Path.

#### Five Spiritual Faculties (Indriya) {#Section0017.xhtml_fivespiritualfacultiesindriya}

Right effort is perseverance. Effort means being persistent, being
patient, continuing again and again, and not giving up. This is the
meaning of effort. Don't use too much energy. Check your quality of
sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā, and paññā. How much interest do you have?
Are you willing to practice? Paññā is understanding, wisdom. So you need
to check if awareness is present in the mind. Is understanding present?
Is wisdom present? Check the quality of the watching, meditating mind.
The mind is meditating. The mind is watching. The mind is practicing.

You don't use too much energy to practice. You are just watching with
the right attitude, right idea, and interest. You need to know if
awareness is present or not. You need to appreciate that awareness is
present, which you are recognizing, being aware of what is going on.

> *You should know if samādhi is present or not. Is samādhi present? If
> you know there's no samādhi, you know there's no samādhi.*

Because you are aware, you know. If you recognize clearly whether
awareness is present or not, if you recognize clearly that samādhi is
present or not, wisdom is present or not, if you recognize clearly that
wisdom is NOT present, this in itself is wisdom! This is also
understanding.

#### Craving {#Section0017.xhtml_craving}

Craving is very tricky; It's always pushing you. Whatever you think,
whatever you say, whatever you do, craving is pushing you, motivating
you. There are many ways for craving to come in or arise in your mind.
What do you want? Sometimes you should ask yourself: What do I want? Do
I want something? There's always wanting. Because of this wanting,
desire, craving, expectation (same meaning), the mind is suffering,
tense, and dissatisfied.

> *If the mind doesn't want anything, it is very free.*

You can't get what you want. If you understand the principle that you
can't get something because you want it and that you only get what comes
from conditions, cause and effect, then desire gets weaker and weaker.
Craving will be less and less. Everything happens because of cause and
effect, not because you want it to happen.

My teacher once said, "If you want, it will happen. If you don't want,
it will not happen." What is the meaning behind this? "If you want, it
will happen" means if you want because of craving, you will suffer. The
first sentence means wanting comes from craving. For example, someone
doesn't like pain. He wants the pain to go away. He wants no pain. The
second sentence, "If you don't want" means if you don't want through
craving or aversion, then suffering doesn't happen. First "wanting" is
because of craving. Second "don't want" is because of wisdom. First is
origin of suffering (samudaya) and dukkha. Second is because of path
knowledge (magga ñāṇa) and no suffering (nirodha). If you have craving
or wanting, lobha, then dosa and aversion come. Craving and aversion are
lobha and dosa. But, magga ñāṇa, "don't want," is because of
understanding that you don't want craving and aversion. That's why
suffering doesn't arise. If you want something with craving, suffering
will surely arise.

You don't get something just because you wanted it. Whatever you get is
because of conditioning, because of cause and effect. But people think
they'll get what they want. Actually, you can only get suffering if you
want something with craving.

> *If you understand that everything happens through cause and effect
> --- everything happens because of conditions --- then you won't want
> craving or aversion, good or bad. Suffering doesn't arise. Peace,
> liberation, freedom comes because you don't want anything.*

Raga khayo Nibbāna, meaning if you don't have craving, this is Nibbāna.
If craving disappears, this is liberation. We are suffering because we
don't know and we want; because we don't know, lobha and dosa exist.

#### Acceptance {#Section0017.xhtml_acceptance}

We are trying to think the right way; we are trying to be aware. We are
not complaining about what is happening. We check our quality of
awareness. Reminding, checking, recognizing. Acceptance is very
important. If we don't have right view or if we don't have right
thought, we can't accept. If we can't accept, we can't learn. We let it
be. We are not trying to change the experience. We don't change the
process. We are trying to be aware.

We don't complain about what is happening. Everything is experience.
Whatever is happening is happening through cause and effect. They do
their job, we do our job. What should we do? We just recognize what is
happening. Everything is nature.

#### Appreciate That The Mind Is Working {#Section0017.xhtml_appreciatethatthemindisworking}

We don't appreciate what we are doing. We are always complaining or
thinking about what is happening. Experience may be good or bad, right
or wrong---It's not important. Experience is experience. We need to
appreciate and we need to recognize that the mind is working, being
aware and watching. If our experience is good, the mind becomes happy.
Happy, happy! If our experience is bad, we become very sad, upset. This
means that we don't understand. We must understand that nature is nature
and object is object. We let go of experience. We are not trying to hold
onto any experience or object. We are trying to appreciate that the mind
is working. We need only to check the quality of awareness of the
watching, meditating mind. Is the meditating mind working or not? Is the
mind interested or not? Is it strong or not? Just check.

#### Strengthening The Mind {#Section0017.xhtml_strengtheningthemind}

Your watching mind must be strong and purified, with less defilement. If
your mind is ready, understanding arises. So take care of your mind,
take care of your practice and take care of your watching mind.
Cultivate it so that it is stronger and stronger.

> *Depending on your quality of mind, the object may be perceived
> differently and the view changes.*

Our duty is to make the quality of awareness stronger. Stronger
awareness means awareness and wisdom are working together continuously.
This is awareness with the right view, right attitude, right idea, and
right thought. If this is continuous, then the mind is stronger and
stronger. We only need to do this. If the mind becomes stronger it can
do its job. Dhamma does its job and nature does its job.

We are not trying to see the object. We are not trying to look for
something. We are trying to make the meditating mind stronger and
stronger.

How do we make the mind stronger? When we are aware, with the right
attitude and right understanding, then the mind has wisdom and it
becomes stronger. This is not because we are putting in a lot of energy;
if we use too much energy the mind will become tired. If we try to see
something, the mind becomes tenser. We are cultivating the quality of
awareness to make the mind stronger and stronger. If we have awareness
with wisdom and continuity, then the mind becomes stronger and stronger.
When the mind becomes stronger it can do its job.

> *For someone who has been meditating or practicing for a long time,
> the mind must be of a better and better quality. The mind is more
> aware, more stable and more peaceful.*

There is more understanding. It should be like this. When we have more
understanding, we have less resistance and fewer reactions. Because of
reactions, we suffer. Because of learning, we understand. With
understanding comes confidence.

#### Anicca, Dukkha, Anatta {#Section0017.xhtml_aniccadukkhaanatta}

Nothing stays the same. Everything is always changing. Nature is
happening because of conditioning. Because of conditions, objects are
arising. This is the meaning of anicca. You need to understand whatever
is happening (thinking is happening, sensation is happening, knowing
mind is happening, awareness is happening); you need to notice that It's
happening. Arising, happening, becoming. Happening, becoming, and
arising. Happening is anicca, happening is dukkha, and happening is
anatta. When your mind is purified you can understand. You can
understand happening is impermanence, happening is dukkha, and happening
is cause and effect, anatta, no body. Awareness is noticing everything
that is happening; object is also happening, knowing is also happening,
sensation is also happening, thinking is also happening. It's all new,
new, new.

#### Simple Experience, Deep Understanding {#Section0017.xhtml_simpleexperiencedeepunderstanding}

When you are aware of some sensation or some object, what do you
understand about this object? Now, what do you understand? Do you
understand something? Sometimes you can know but you don't understand.
You know many objects and you are aware of many things. What is your
purpose?

Defilements cover the mind. We can't understand the nature of
defilement. That's why we need to understand the nature of craving, the
nature of aversion, the nature of delusion. Then they have no chance to
come in. When the mind is clear, without craving, without aversion,
without delusion, the mind is ready to understand. When the mind is
clear then wisdom can arise.

> *The experience may be very simple, but our understanding may be very
> deep. Because of understanding of object as object (understanding very
> deeply) we don't have delusion, craving, or aversion.*

We have many experiences throughout the day; we are always meeting
experiences. But when our watching mind is purified, when awareness and
understanding are complete, this simple experience becomes very strange
\[extraordinary\]. Because we have always had the wrong view when
knowing experience and now we have right view, right understanding, our
view is opposite---very strange \[extraordinary\].

#### The Chance To Practice Mindfulness Meditation Is Very Rare {#Section0017.xhtml_thechancetopracticemindfulnessmeditationisveryrare}

To be aware of something sounds simple, but this technique is very
difficult to practice. We can practice this way, with this technique
when a Buddha arises. But if we have no Buddha, we can't practice. Truly
practicing mindfulness meditation is very rare.

#### Dhamma Is Everywhere {#Section0017.xhtml_dhammaiseverywhere}

Because the mind is covered by defilements, we are unable to see dhamma
or to understand nature as it is. What is the meaning of nature? It is
cause and it is also effect. The cause and effect process itself is
nature. Whatever is happening in the present moment is nature, dhamma.
Even defilements become dhamma, become nature. Nature is becoming,
nature is arising, knowing is arising and awareness is arising---object
and mind, object and mind. In nature, there is nobody there. Nature is
not us, not them, not others; nature is nature.

Dhamma is ever present and there is dhamma talk everywhere. Nature is
also teaching us dhamma but we are unable to hear. We can't know or see
dhamma because of the defilements in the mind and because there isn't
enough understanding or wisdom. If we can think and see nature as it
really is, the mind is free and free from defilements.

> *Dhamma is everywhere.\
> Dhamma is there all the time, everywhere.\
> Is the mind ready to understand?*

### GLOSSARY OF SELECTED PĀLI TERMS {#Section0018.xhtml_glossaryofselectedpaliterms}

Ashin Tejaniya frequently uses key Pāli terms in Dhamma discussions and
discourses. Below you will find some of the frequently used terms. This
glossary is far from comprehensive, but the explanations given should be
sufficient for our purposes. Please consult Buddhist texts and
dictionaries for more complete definitions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

adhitthāna - determination,resolution

adosa - hatelessness akusala (also see kusala) - kammically unwholesome,
unskillful, unprofitable anatta (also see atta)\
a) not-self, non-ego, impersonality, there is no abiding substance (or
an ego, a self, or a soul), there is no self-existing entity\
b) nothing can arise on its own or from a single cause and nothing can
exist or move on its own\
c) one of the three universal characteristics of existence (see dukkha
and anicca), understanding anatta is a liberating insight (paññā)

anicca\
a) impermanence, all conditioned phenomena are impermanent, everything
that comes into existence changes and passes away\
b) one of the three universal characteristics of existence (see dukkha
and anatta), understanding anicca is a liberating insight (paññā)

anusaya - potential or latent defilements

appamāda - heedfulness, non-laxity, diligence, presence of
self-awareness (literally: non- forgetfulness) asammoha-sampajañña -
clear knowledge of non-delusion; understanding anicca, dukkha, and
anatta atta - self, ego, personality avijjā - synonym for moha ayoniso
manasikāra (opposite of yoniso manasikāra) - a)wrong attitude, wrong
frame of mind, wrong attention b)unwise consideration

bhāvanā - mental development, meditation

bhāvanāmayā pāññā - wisdom or knowledge acquired through direct
experience, through mental development bhava-taṇhā - craving for
existence

bhikkhu - fully ordained monk, member of the Saṅgha

bojjhaṅga - the seven factors of enlightenment, also referred to as
sambojjhaṅga

cetasika - mental factor (This refers to the 52 mental factors listed in
the abhidhamma. Some are kammically neutral, some kammically wholesome
and some kammically unwholesome.) chanda - wholesome intention,
aspiration, zeal, wholesome desire

cintāmayā paññā - wisdom or knowledge acquired by thinking and
reasoning, by intellectual analysis citta - mind

cittānupassanā - contemplation of the mind

dāna - giving, offering, generosity

dhamma - conditioned object, thing, phenomena, "natural law," "nature"

Dhamma - Teachings of the Buddha, practice of meditation

dhammānupassanā - contemplation of dhamma

dhamma-vicaya - investigation of phenomena, investigation of dhamma

ditthi - view, belief, speculative opinion; micchā-diṭṭhi (wrong view) /
sammā-diṭṭhi (right view)

domanassa - any kind of unpleasant mental feeling, mentally painful
feeling

dosa - hatred, anger, any kind of aversion or disliking (including
sadness, fear, resistance, etc.)

dukkha\
a) unsatisfactoriness, pain, suffering\
b) the suffering in change\
c) the unsatisfactory nature of all existence, of all conditioned
phenomena\
d) one of the three universal characteristics of existence (see anicca
and anatta), understanding dukkha is a liberating insight (paññā)

dukkha-dukkha - unsatisfactoriness, pain, suffering

gocara-sampajañña - clear knowledge or understanding that there are just
mental and physical processes

indriya - the five spiritual faculties: sati, samādhi, viriya, saddhā,
and paññā

jhāna - meditative absorption

kāmacchanda - sensual desire

kamma - volitional action (of body, speech, and mind)

kāyānupassanā - contemplation of the body

khandha - five aggregates or categories: rūpa, vedanā, saññā, saṅkhāra,
viññāṇa

kilesa - defilements, unwholesome qualities of the mind, any
manifestation of greed, anger, and delusion (see lobha, dosa, and moha)

kusala (also see akusala) - kammically wholesome, skillful, profitable

lobha - greed, any kind of craving or liking (synonym for taṇhā)

magga-ñāṇa - path knowledge (leading to Enlightenment)

magga-phala - literally "path and fruit"; synonym for Enlightenment

mettā - loving-kindness, selfless love, unconditional love

mettā-bhāvanā - cultivation of loving kindness

micchā-ditthi - wrongview

moha - delusion, ignorance, not understanding, not seeing reality
(synonym for avijjā)

muditā - altruistic or sympathetic joy

nāma - mental processes, mind (collective term for vedanā, saññā,
saṅkhāra, and viññāṇa)

nāma-rūpa - mental and physical processes

ñāṇa - synonym for paññā

nekkhamma - renunciation, "freedom from defilements"

nirodha - extinction

Pāli - name of the language in which the Buddhist scriptures (Pāli
Canon) were first recorded

paññā - wisdom, understanding, knowledge, insight (synonym for ñāṇa)

paññatti - relative (conceptual) reality, concepts

paramattha - ultimate reality

pāramī - perfections, potential "talents": Perfection in giving,
morality, renunciation, wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness,
resolution, loving-kindness, and equanimity

pariyutthāna - used to describe kilesas which arise in the mind

passaddhi - tranquility

pīti - joyful interest, enthusiasm, rapture

putthujjana - literally "one of the man folk," a worldling, someone who
has not yet experienced Enlightenment

rūpa - physical processes, corporeality

sacca - truth (many meanings)

saddhā - faith, confidence, trust

samādhi - calmness, stillness or stability of mind

samatha - tranquility meditation, concentration meditation

saṃsāra - cycle of suffering, round of rebirths

sammā-samādhi - Right Samādhi

sammā-saṅkappa - Right Thought

sammā-sati - Right Awareness

sammā-vāyāma - Right Effort

samudaya-sacca - truth of the origin

saṅkhāra - mental formations

saṅkhāra-dukkha - the unsatisfactory nature of all existence, of all
conditioned phenomena saññā recognition, memory, perception

sappāya-sampajañña - clear knowledge of suitability

sati - mindfulness or awareness

Satipatthāna Sutta - the four foundations of mindfulness, see
kāyanupassanā, vedanānupassanā, cittānupassanā, and dhammānupassanā

sati-sambojjhaṅga - the enlightenment factor of mindfulness

sati-sampajjañña - mindfulness and clear comprehension

sātthaka-sampajañña - clear knowledge of whether a mental, verbal, or
physical action is beneficial or not

sīla - morality, ethical conduct, virtue

somanassa - any kind of pleasant mental feeling, mental agreeable
feeling, mentally pleasurable feeling

sukha - happiness

sutamayā paññā - wisdom or knowledge acquired through reading or hearing

sutta - discourse of the Buddha

taṇhā - synonym for lobha

upekkhā\
a) neutral feelings and sensations (vedanā)\
b) equanimity, a wholesome mental state (saṅkhāra, cetasika)

vedanā - pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral feelings or sensations

vedanānupassanā - contemplation of feeling

viññāṇa - consciousness, cognition, the knowing mind

vipariṇāma-dukkha - the suffering in change

vipassanā - insight, insight meditation

viriya - effort, energy, "wisdom" energy, "remindfulness"

vītikkama - used to describe kilesas which are expressed verbally or
physically

yoniso manasikāra\
a) right attitude, right frame of mind, right attention\
b) wise consideration
